MHI 

c °py 3 FM 21-11 



WAR DEPARTMENT 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 

FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 

April 7, 1943 

\ II P. I, , ^. u ,|l i - . . ^ || I , 1 i n 



FM 21-11 

BASIC FIELD MANUAL 
FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



Prepared under direction of the 
Commanding General, 
Army Service Forces 




UNITED STATES 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
WASHINGTON i 1M? 



For sate by the Superintendent of Documents, U. H. Government Printing Office 
Washington, D. C. 



WAR DEPARTMENT, 
Washington, April 7, 1943. 



FM 21-11, Basic Field Manual, First Aid for Soldiers, is 
published for the information and guidance of all concerned. 

[A. G. 002.11 (0-15-42).] 

By order of the Secretary of War : 

G. C. MARSHALL, 

Chief oj Staff. 

Official: 

J. A. ULIO, 

Major General, 

The Adjutant General. 

Distribution: 
X. 

(For explanation of symbol see FM 21-6.) 



TABLE OP CONTENTS 

Paragraphs I*uj?o 



Section I. General 1-5 1 

II. Wounds 6-13 3 

HI. Fractures, dislocations, and sprains lt-28 13 

IV. Common emergencies and health 

measures 29-48 30 

V. Effects of severe heat, ai^J measures 

lor use in the desert 49-52 80 

VT. Effects ol severe cold, and measures 

for use In the Arctic 83-58 83 

VTI. Measures for use in the jungle and 

Tropics ^ 89-62 60 

Vill. Measures for use In aircraft and tant 

injuries 63-64 61 

IX. Transportation of sick and injured 65-67 65 

X. War gases 68-69 85 

XI. Description of first-aid kits and 

packets 70-80 87 

XII. Uses of contents of nrst-aid kits and 

packets Bl-127 104 

Index 113 



III. 



KBl 21-11 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 

FIRST AID FOE SOLDIERS 

(The matter contained herein supersedes chapter 10, FM 21-10; 
and section II, chapter 11, FM 21-100.) 

Section I 

GENERAL 

■ 1. Purpose op Manual. — The purpose of this manual is to 
teach the soldier what he can do for himself or a fellow 
soldier if injury or sickness occurs when no medical officer 
or Medical Department soldier is nearby. Information is also 
given concerning the use of certain supplies which are for 
the purpose of helping to keep well. If a soldier does the right 
thing, he may save his own or someone else's life, or at least 
relieve suffering. If he does the wrong thing, he may do 
more harm than if he does nothing. 

■ 2. Definition. — First aid means those medical measures 
which a soldier can carry out for himself or a companion and 
does not apply to the emergency medical treatment which is 
given by a medical officer or a Medical Department soldier. 

■ 3. Soldier's Equipment for First Am. — Every soldier is 
issued certain equipment for giving first aid. Besides the 
supplies which he carries, other equipment will be found in 
the first-aid kits and packets in motor vehicles, airplanes, or 
among special troops. Soldiers whose assignments may re- 
quire them to know how to use special first-aid equipment 
can find descriptions, illustrations, and directions for use of 
these supplies in sections XI and XII. In addition to the 
first-aid supplies mentioned, many objects which are a reg- 
ular part of every soldier's clothing and general equipment 
or which will be found almost anywhere can be used in giving 
certain types of first aid. 

■ 4. Important- Firsi-Aid Rules. 

a. Do not get excited; act quickly but calmly, 

b. Do riot try to do too much. 



1 



4-7 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



C. Handle an injured person gently. 

d, Keep an injured person warm. 

e. Whenever possible, give an injured person first aid 
before he is moved. 

/, Do not pour liquids into the mouth of an unconscious 
person; to do this may choice him. 

g. Do not try to bring an unconscious injured person to 
consciousness. Let him lie quietly, face down, with his head 
turned to one side. 

h. Remember that drugs are dangerous if too much is 
given; follow directions when using drugs in first-aid kits 
and packets. 

i. Anyone who has been given first aid for a serious con- 
dition should be seen as soon as possible by a medical officer, 

■ 5. First Aid in Comd at. — Successful accomplishment of the 
assigned mission is the aim of battle. The combat soldier 
will administer first aid only when he can do so without 
interfering with his combat duties. When administration of 
first aid in actual combat is possible, usually only those 
measures Will be taken which are immediately necessary to 
save life. The wounded person should be placed where he 
is protected from enemy fire and the elements, marking the 
spot where he lies so that he can be easily found by Medical 
Department personnel, 

Section H 
.WOUNDS 

■ 6. General. — Wounds are the most common conditions 
which require first aid. Prompt and correct first aid for 
wounds will not only speed their healing, but will often 
save a life. First aid for wounds includes measures to stop 
bleeding, overcome shock, relieve pain, and prevent Infection, 

■ 7. Exposure of Wound. — To give proper first aid, the en- 
tire wound must be well exposed in order to ascertain 
exactly where it is, how large it is, and how much it" is 
bleeding. When a wound has been caused by a bullet, a 
shell fragment, or other object which could have gone all 
the way through a part of the body, look for a wound where 
the object may have come out, because the wound where 



a 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



7-8 



it comes out is usually larger than the wound where it goes 
in. In order to see all wounds which may be present, cut, 
tear, or remove the clothing as much as necessary. Do not 
drag clothes over a wound; carefully lift them off. 

■ 8. Bleeding. — All open wounds bleed more or less. Bleed- 
ing from an artery is known as arterial bleeding, and bleeding 
from a vein is known as venous bleeding. Bleeding from the 
arteries is more dangerous because the blood flows fast and 
will soon cause a person to bleed to death unless the flow 
of blood is stopped. In most severe wounds there is bleeding 
from both arteries and veins. Bleeding of any type must be 
stopped as soon as possible. The first-aid methods to stop 
bleeding are to press directly over the wound, to elevate the 
wounded part, or to use a tourniquet. 

a. Direct pressure over wound. — Direct pressure over the 
wound should always be tried first. To do this, put a sterile 
dressing, such as the one in your individual first-aid packet. 




Figube 1. — Direct pressure over a wound to stop bleeding. 
3 



8 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



over the wound and press firmly on the dressing as shown 
in figure 1. Keep up the pressure for at least 5 minutes and 
then hold the dressing in place by bandaging. (See par. 
lid.) More than one dressing may be needed for large 
wounds. 

b. Elevating wounded part. — Raising a wounded arm or leg 
high above the body, as shown in figure 2, will help to stop 




Piguhe 2. — Elevation of an arm to Help atop bleeding. 



bleeding. The wounded person must lie down and the arm 
or leg must be held up as high as possible while direct pres- 
sure is made on the wound and a sterile dressing is put on. 

e. Use of tourniquet. — (1) Do not use a tourniquet unless 
bleeding cannot be stopped by other means. Bleeding from 
a wound can usually be stopped by applying a sterile dressing, 
pressing directly over the wound, and, if possible, raising the 
wounded part. If a regular issue tourniquet is used, the 
bucltle should be on the inside of the upper arm or thigh 
as shown in figures 3 and 4, and the strap should be pulled 



4 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



3 



in a downward direction while the injured part is steadied. 
If bleeding cannot be stopped by simply pulling the tourniquet 
tight, loosen it enough to slip a bayonet or other object under 
it so that it can be made tight enough by twisting. 

(2) For bleeding from the arm and hand, put on the 
tourniquet about a hand's breadth below the armpit as shown 
in Figure 3, For the thigh and leg, put It on about a hand's 
breadth below the crotch as shown in figure 4. 




Fkhjbe 3. — Application of tourniquet to arm. 



(3) If a regular tourniquet is not available, a triangular 
bandage, a tie, a belt, or a handkerchief will do instead. 
Figure 5 shows how a tourniquet is tightened by twisting it 
with a bayonet or a stick. 

(4) Tighten a tourniquet only as much as is necessary to 
stop bleeding. t 

(5) A properly applied tourniquet stops all the blood going 
to the Injured part, and gangrene may develop if a tourniquet 
is left on too long. It should be loosened every 20 or 30 
minutes, and then tightened again after 10 or 15 seconds. 

<6) Do not cover a tourniquet with a bandage or a splint 
because, if covered, it may be forgotten and left on too long. 



5 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



8-9 



If you put a tourniquet on a wounded person who is conscious 
and then leave him, tell him to be sure to get someone to 
loosen it for at least 10 or 15 seconds every 20 or 30 minutes. 

■ 9. Shock. — a. Shock is a condition of weakness which 
usually follows wounds, burns, or other injuries. When se- 
vere shock has developed, the injured person Is pale, and his 
skin is cold and wet with sweat. Remember, however, that 
these are signs of severe and fully developed shock. A person 
who is suffering from a mild degree of shock may not show 
these signs. First-aid measures for shock should, whenever 
possible, be started before the injured person has developed 
definite signs of shock. Shock is especially likely to occur if 
a person is bleeding. Shock can also be caused or increased 
by exposure to cold, fatigue, or hunger. A certain amount 
of shock follows all injuries and burns; it may be slight and 
last only for a few minutes, or it may be severe and last for a 
long time, and may even cause death. As a rule,' the more 
severe an injury or burn, the greater will be the amount of 
shock. Shock often does not appear until many minutes or 
even several hours after a wound, burn, or other injury. Even 
before shock can be noticed, take measures to prevent it. 

b. Handle the injured person gently, avoid unnecessary, 
moving of the injured part or of the injured person, and in all 
other ways make him as comfortable as possible.- 

C. To prevent or overcome shock, put the injured person 
on his back with his head anjj shoulders lower than his legs 
and hips. If he is unconscious, keep him face down, with 
his head turned to one side, and with his head and shoulders 
lower than his legs and hips.' 

d. Stop any bleeding as soon as possible. 

e. Remove the individual's pack and loosen tight clothing 
or straps. 

/. Keep an injured person warm, but be sure not to over- 
heat him because overheating can increase shock instead of 
preventing or overcoming it. Ordinarily, simply cover him 
with extra clothing or blankets. If the weather is cold, apply 
heat by means of bottles or canteens filled with hot water, or 
by means of warm stones or bricks. These warm objects can 
be placed between the legs, under the armpits, and beside the 
waist; they should be covered or placed between blankets and 



7 



9-11 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



should not be put against bare skin or against very thin 
clothing because they may burn the person. 

g. Warm drinks are helpful in shock. If a person has a 
wound of the abdomen or throat, never give him more than a 
few small sips of water to wet his lips. Unless very thirsty, 
a person with a wound of the abdomen or throat should be 
given nothing to drink, and should never be given anything 
to eat. 

■ 10. Pain. — Some pain occurs sooner or later following all 
wounds. ' Pain is often so slight that it does not bother the 
injured person enough to require any particular attention 
but. if pain is severe, it must be relieved as much as possible. 
Pain can often be prevented or relieved by simple measures 
such as keeping an injured person quiet and warm, carefully 
changing his position to make him comfortable, splinting 
an injured arm or leg, and gentle handling during transporta- 
tion. Only when pain is severe, or when a badly injured 
person must be moved quickly, as from a wrecked vehicle or 
aircraft, is it wise to give him morphine. If pain is severe, 
however, a dose of morphine will not only relieve the pain but 
will also lessen shock. If morphine is needed to relieve pain, 
it will be found in certain first-aid kits and packets, already 
prepared for injection, in a collapsible tube with an attached 
needle. Directions for its use are given in paragraph 110 and 
are shown in figures 96 and 97. 

Caution: The full effects of, morphine are not felt for 
20 to 30 minutes after injection, A second injection of mor- 
phine for continued severe pain should not be given sooner 
than 2 hours after the first one. Never give a second dose 
of morphine to a person who is breathing 12 or less times a 
minute. Never give morphine to an unconscious person. 

■ 11. Infection. — a. Whenever the skin is torn or cut, infec- 
tion may occur. Infection is very likely to take place if a 
wound touches the ground, or if anything else dirty touches 
or gets into it. A wound which becomes infected is much 
more serious than one which is kept clean, so the prevention 
of infection is a very important first-aid measure. At the 
same time that bleeding is being stopped and a dressing ap- 
plied, as well as after these first-aid measures have been 



8 



FIKSI AID FOR SOLDIERS 



11 



carried out, care must be taken to keep a wound ciean, so 
as to prevent infection. 

b. Do not touch a wound with dirty hands or dirty clothing.. 
Do not allow a wound to touch the ground. Do not wash a 
wound. 




Figtjbe 6. — First-aid packet being opened by pulling on metal tape 
Which seals the container. 



c. If there is only a small amount of bleeding from a wound 
when first seen, or if bleeding has been easily stopped, sprinkle 
sulfanilamide, which is in the first-aid packet (figs. 6 and 1) , 
into the wound as shown in figure 8, and then apply the sterile 
dressing, which is also in the first-aid packet. When bleeding 
has been hard to stop, do not lift up or take off the dressing 
to sprinkle sulfanilamide into the wound ; removing the dress- 
ing may start bleeding again. 

d. The proper application of a sterile dressing is an im- 
portant means of preventing infection as well as of stopping 
bleeding. To use the dressing in the first-aid packet, care- 
fully remove the wrapper as shown in figure 9. Open the 



9 




11 



11 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



compress by pulling on the two folded bandages attached 
to the compress, as shown in figure 10, being careful not to 
touch the inside of the compress with the fingers or anything 
else. Still holding one folded bandage in each hand, apply 
the compress to the wound as shown in figure 11 ; then wrap 
the bandage around the injured part of the body and tie the 
ends together or fasten them with safety pins. 




PiaintE 11. — Application oi dressing to wound. 



e. When wounded other than in the abdomen or throat, 
take by mouth, along with a large amount of water, the eight 
sulfadiazine tablets (or the twelve sulfanilamide tablets 
found in some packets instead of sulfadiazine tablets) which 
are in the sealed packet carried in the first-aid pouch at- 
tached to the cartridge belt. If sweating has been great or 
If large amounts of water cannot be taken both with the 
drug and for 24 hours afterward, no sulfadiazine or. sulfa- 
nilamide tablets are to be taken. 



12 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



12-14 



■ 12. Splinting of Injured Arm or Leg. — A severely 'Wounded 
arm or leg should, if possible, be splinted (par. 17) or placed 
in a sling after dressings have been applied, even if no bone 
is broken; this will keep the injured part at rest and will help 
to prevent bleeding, to lessen shock, to relieve pain, and to 
prevent infection. 

■ 13. Wounds Requiring Special Attention. — a. Wounds 
extending into the chest. — If there is a wound of the chest 
through which air is sucking in and blowing out, the life of 
the person may depend upon quickly applying a dressing 
which is large enough to cover the wound and which com- 
pletely stops the flow of air through the wound. If this does 
not stop the back and forth movement of air, apply more 
dressing. A large piece of raincoat, overcoat, blouse or shirt 
applied tightly over the dressing may be useful in making 
the dressing airtight. A person with a wound of the chest 
will be more comfortable and breathe more easily if he lies 
on the injured side. 

o. Wounds entering the abdomen. — If a bullet or other 
object has gone into or through the abdomen, the injured 
person should be given nothing to eat or drink. Under no 
circumstances give anything more than a few small sips of 
water to wet his lips. If the abdominal organs have come 
through the wound do not try to put them back. Sprinkle 
sulfanilamide over the wound and organs, and put on a 
large sterile dressing. 

c. Wounds of the jaws, mouth, and face. — If there is a 
wound of these parts, the face of the wounded person should 
be kept pointed toward the ground in order to prevent blood 
from getting into the back of the throat where it may cause 
choking. Until bleeding stops, keep the person in a sitting 
position with his head bent forward. If it is necessary for 
him to lie down, or if he must be carried on a litter, keep his 
face pointed to the ground. 

Section HT 

FRACTURES, DISLOCATIONS, AND SPRAINS 

■ 14. Types of Fractures. — A simple fracture is a break 
in a bone. A compound fracture is one in which, there is 
a flesh wound which extends through the skin and down 

5l5790» — 43 3 13 





14-17 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



to the broken bone. The flesh wounds in compound frac- 
tures are usually caused by the sharp ends of the broken 
bone or by bullets or fragments of high explosive shells, 
grenades, or bombs. Compound fractures are more serious 
than simple fractures because of the danger of infection 
in the flesh wound and because shock is usually greater. 
Careless handling of a simple fracture may cause it to 
become a compound fracture. 

■ 15. Signs and Symptoms of Fracture. — One or more of 
the following signs or symptoms may be present when there 
is a fracture: 

a. Pain and tenderness near the fracture. 

b. Partial or complete loss of ability of the injured person 
to move the part. „ . 

c. Deformity (unnatural shape) . 

d. Swelling. 

e. Discoloration (blueness about the point of injury). 

/. Grating of bone ends may be felt, but no attempt should 
be made to produce this. 

■ 16. First Aid for Fractures. — a. Handle all persons with 
fractures, or even suspected fractures, with the greatest 
gentleness; rough or careless handling causes pain and shock. 
Immediate transportation of a person with a serious frac- 
ture is sometimes harmful even if done very carefully; 
this is especially true of fractures of the thigh, hip, leg, or 
back, and in all cases in which shock has already appeared. 
Give first aid, Including splinting of the fracture, where the 
injured person is lying; 

i>. Straighten the limb by pulling gently but steadily upon 
its lower end. 

c. Keep up this steady pull and support the limb on 
either side of the fracture until a splint is applied. 

■ 17. Splints. — a. A splint should be as wide as the limb 
and long enough to prevent movement of the next joint in 
either direction from the fracture. Temporary splints can 
be made from many common materials such as shingles, 
pieces of board, bayonet scabbards, pieces of tin, wire mesh, 
and folded blankets. Pad splints well on the side toward 
the skin and bind them securely in place at several points 



14 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



17-18 



above and below the fracture but not over the fracture. 

b. Be sure that bandages are not so tightly bound as to 
stop the circulation of blood when swelling of the limb 
occurs, as it usually does after a fracture. Swelling, cold- 
ness, stiffness, blueness, or numbness of a foot or hand is 
often due to too tight bandaging. If any of these signs are 
noticed, loosen the bandages which hold on the splints but 
do not remove them. 

■ 18. Slings. — In fractures or other severe injuries of the 
arm or shoulder, the arm should usually be supported by 
a sling, in addition to the use of splints ot, other first-aid 
measures. A triangular bandage (pars. 72 and 73) makes 
a very good sling (figs. 12, 13, 14, and 15) , but arm slings 
may be made from ordinary bandages, clothing, or by using 
safety pins to fasten the coat or shirt sleeve to the front of 
the coat or shirt. The coat flap or shirt tail may be used 
as a sling by pinning it to the coat or shirt or by punching 
a hole through the lower edge of the flap or tail and buttoning 
this to one of the upper coat or shirt buttons. Various 
types of slings are shown in figures 12 to 18, inclusive. 




flCOTE 12.- — Triangular bandage. 

15 



FIRST AID FOE SOLDIERS 




BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



18 




18 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



18 




19-21 



basic held Manual 



■ 19. Fractures With Flesh Wounds (Compound Frac- 
tures). — In fractures with flesh wounds, both the flesh 
wound and the fracture require first-aid measures. Stop 
bleeding, sprinkle sulfanilamide into the wound, and bandage 
with a sterile dressing. If the bone is sticking through the 
skin, do not push it back. Straighten the injured part by 
gently pulling upon it, and apply a splint. 

■ 20. Fractures op Arm Above the Elbow. — Apply two 
splints, one on the inner side from the armpit to the elbow 




Fjguhe 18. — Splints and sling for fracture ol arm above the elbow 
nand another on the outer side from the shoulder to the elbow 
as shown in figure 19. Support the forearm and hand with 
a sling. 

If no better means are at hand for splinting a broken arm, 
bind it to the body, keeping the forearm bent at the elbow, 
with the hand near the opposite shoulder, as shown in figure 
20. 

■ 21. Fractures at or Near the Elbow. — Place the forearm 
and band In a sling which also covers the lower part of the 



22 



First aid for soldiers 



21-22 



upper arm as shown in figure 15. If the elbow cannot be 
bent because of pain or swelling, apply a single straight splint 
extending from the upper part of the upper arm to the palm 
of the hand, as shown in figure 21. 




JPiguke 20. — Upper arm bound to faody as a means of splinting. 

■ 22. Fractures op Arm Below the Elbow (Forearm).— 
With the arm bent half way at the elbow, apply a splint to 
the inner surface, extending to the tips of the fingers and 
another to the outer surface, also extending to the finger 
tips, as shown in figure 22. 



23 



22 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



23-25 



■ 23, Fractures of Collar Bone. — Bend the forearm to a 
right angle in front of the body and place it in a sling as 
shown in Sgure 15. 

■ 24. Fractures of Leo, Knee, or Ankle. — Apply two splints, 
one on the outside, the other on the inside of the limb, ex- 
tending from above the knee to beyond the foot. Support 
can be given by a splint made of two" sticks padded with 




Pigube 23. — Splint for fracture of leg, knee, or ankle — intermediate 

step. 



clothing or a blanket, as shown in figures 23 and 24. A 
piece of tin, molded in the form of a gutter, makes a very 
good splint for leg fractures. If there are no other means 
of splinting a broken leg, pad it well and bind it to the other 
leg. In snow country, skis may be used as splints. 

■ 25. Fractures op Thigh or Hip. — It is especially important 
to apply a splint before moving persons with such fractures. 
Apply a long splint, reaching from the armpit to beyond 
the foot on the outside, and another from the crotch to the 



25 



FmSI AID FOR SOLDIERS 



25-27 



foot on the inside, as shown in figure 25. A blanket rolled 
into two rolls to form a trough will help to keep a broken 
leg steady. If there is no other means of splinting a broken 
thigh, bind the injured leg to the well leg. If an injured 
person .with a fracture of the leg must be moved before 
a splint can be applied, carry him as gently as possible, sup- 
porting the injured limb above and below the fracture and 
keeping it straight as shown in figure 26. 




Figure 26.— Support above and below fracture cf right lower leg 
near knee. 



M 26. Fractures of the Jaw. — For a simple fracture of the 
jaw, apply a bandage which extends tinder the jaw and over 
the top of the head, holding the teeth closed; this will sup- 
port the jaw and keep it at rest. For a compound fracture 
of the jaw, with bleeding into the mouth, apply a dressing 
Which covers the flesh wound but which will not keep the 
wounded person from spitting out the blood. 

* 27. Fractures op Spine (Neck or Back). — It is often im- 
possible to be sure that there is or is not a fracture of the 
spine. Whenever a person has been in an accident in which 
his back may have been sharply bent or struck, keep in mind 



27 



27 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



that either his neck or back may have been fractured. Pain 
in the back or neck, loss of power to move all or part of an 
arm or leg, or lack of feeling in an arm or leg, may follow a 
fracture of the spine, but one or more of these symptoms 
may be absent. If a broken neck or back is suspected, the 
injured person's head should not be lifted even to drink 
water. Do not let the injured person try to stand or sit up. 
Very gently straighten him out and roll (do not lift) him onto 
his back, being careful not to bend or twist his neck or back. 




PiotTBE 27. — Person with a fracture of the spine being rolled onto a 

litter. 



Unless it is absolutely necessary to do otherwise, leave to 
trained Medical Department personnel the transportation 
of a person who has an injured back. If, however, it is 
necessary to move a person who has such an injury, he should 
be rolled in the same careful way when being moved onto 
a litter (sec par. 65) as shown in figure 27. Put a rool of cloth- 
ing or blanket about 4 inches thick under the small of his 
back, as shown in figure 28. If it is thought a person may 
have a broken neck, keep his head from rolling from side to 



28 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



27 




Fiouee 29. — Support of head of person with lractured neck. 



515790 ° — 43 3 



29 



27-29 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



side by placing something such as blanket rolls, folded clothes, 
or stones on each side of his head to steady it as shown in 
figure 29. When the combat situation permits, three or more 
persons should help in moving anyone who has a fracture 
of the back or rieck; one person should support the buttocks 
and legs, a second person should support the chest and 
shoulders, and a third person should support the head to pre- 
vent bending or twisting of the neck. Unless a person with 
an injured back can be moved with the care outlined above 
he should not be moved until medical personnel arrives. 

H 28. Dislocations and Sprains. — When a bone gets out of 
place at a joint, the condition is called a dislocation. When 
the ligaments around a joint are torn or bruised, the conditioo 
is called a sprain. In both these conditions pain is usually 
severe, and shock may be present. It is often impossible to 
tell the difference between a sprain, a dislocation, and a frac- 
ture; when this is the case, the first aid given should be the 
same as for a fracture. 

a. First aid for dislocations. — (1) If the injury is to the 
shoulder, elbow, wrist or hand, place the arm in a sling. 

(2) If the injury is to the hip, knee, ankle or foot, splint the 
limb and give the same care as for fractures in these parts of 
the body. 

b. First aid for sprains (strains).- — (1) In severe sprains 
of the shoulder, elbow, wrist, aJKi hand, place the arm in a 
sling. For a sprain of the witsfc, Arm bandaging will give 
relief. 

(2) In severe sprains of the hip, knee, ankle, or foot, it is 
sometimes necessary to apply a splint just as for a fracture of 
these parts. Firmly bandaging an ankle sprain sometimes 
gives relief and makes it possible to walk without much pain. 

Section IV 

COMMON EMERGENCIES AND HEALTH MEASURES 

■ 29. Snake Bite. — a. Snake venom acts rapidly, so first aid 
must be given quickly to prevent the poison from being 
spread throughout the body. 

i>. When a snake bite is on an arm or leg put on a tourni- 
quet at once, placing it between the trunk of the body and the 



30 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



29 



bite. Apply the tourniquet above the knee, in foot and leg 
bites; above the elbow, in hand and arm bites. A necktie, 
belt, handkerchief, or triangular bandage can be used as a 
tourniquet. The tourniquet should be loosened every 20 to 30 
minutes for 10 or 15 seconds. 

c. Apply iodine to the area around the bite. 

d. Paint with iodine, either the lancet in the snake-bite kit 
(figs. 30 and 31) , the blade of a pocket knife, or a razor blade. 




Figure 30. — Snake-bite kit — outside view. 



e. Make cross incisions Vi-inch long and 14 -inch deep over 
each fang mark (fig. 32) . 

/. Apply suction to the wound for 20 minutes before loosen- 
ing tourniquet. Keep up suction for at least three 20-minute 
periods. This can be done by mouth (fig. 33) , if a snake bite 
kit is not handy; snake venom is harmless in the mouth, 
unless there are cuts or seres. If a snake-bite kit is available, 
use the small oval cup for making suction on fingers and 
toes; for flatter surfaces use the round cup <fig. 34). Press 
the cup tightly over the incisions and press and release the 
plunger to produce suction. Suction may be increased by 
repeating this movement (figs. 34 and 35). 



31 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




32 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



Fir.DRE 32. — Cross incisions through snake-bite fang-marks. 



Figure 33. — Suction by moutb. lor snake bite. 



33 



29 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



29 




29-31 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



g. If the breathing of a person who has been bitten by a 
snake becomes difficult or shows signs of stopping, give 
artificial respiration as shown in figures 47 and 48. 

h. If there is a great amount of bleeding from the incisions, 
place a gauze compress on the wound and press the thumb 
or one or more fingers firmly over the incisions. 

i. After the last period of suction has been completed, re- 
move the tornlquet; sprinkle sulfanilamide into the incisions 
(fig. 36) ; and apply a sterile dressing (fig. 37) . 

■ 30. Insect Bites and Stings. — a. These can often be pre- 
vented by sleeping under a mosquito net, wearing a head net 
and gloves, and by using insect repellent (see pars. 76 and 7") . 
To apply insect repellent, turn the bottle upside down and 
spread a small amount of the liquid over uncovered skin sur- 
faces. One application will usually keep insects away for 2 
hours. 

b. For severe insect stings such as those caused by bees and 
wasps, the application of a folded cloth thoroughly wet with 
cold water will help relieve discomfort. Do not scratch the 
stung area; to do this increases the danger of infection. 

c. First aid for poisonous spider bites is the same as for 
snake bites. 

■ 31. Ticks, Pleas, and Lice. — When in a region infested with 
these vermin, all clothing should be removed at least once a 
day and the body and clothing carefully inspected. The use 
of insecticide powder for body crawling insects (fig. 38) will 
help greatly in keeping away vermin, especially lice. It is 
furnished to the individual soldier through his unit com- 
mander when in an area where it is likely to be needed. For 
the destruction of lice in clothing, lightly dust the seams and 
infested parts at weekly intervals. For the prevention of 
chigger and tick bites, dust the belt line and the inner side 
of the clothing of the lower extremities including the socks 
and shoes. When troops are sleeping on the ground, their 
bedding should be protected from infestation with crawling 
insects by lightly dusting it with the powder at weekly in- 
tervals. When removing ticks, be careful not to leave the 
head of the tick In the skin, and do not crush the tick. The 
tick may be removed properly by pulling gently but steadily 



36 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



31-34 



upon its body or by placing a lighted cigarette close to its 
body so that it releases itself from the skin. Paint the area of 
a tick bite with iodine. Clothing in which fleas or lice are 
found should be disinfected. 




Figure 38. — Insecticide powder for body crawling insects. 



■ 32. Jelly Pish, Portuguese Man-of-War, and Nettle 
Stings. — a. To relieve the burning sensation caused by any 
of these, dry the skin immediately and press one or both of 
the hands firmly against the painful area. 

b. Rubbing the skin with sand or scrubbing the. skin with 
soap and water to remove tentacles is also helpful. 

■ 33. Leeches. — After marching through water, brush, or 
grass where there are leeches, take off and examine shoes, 
leggins, and socks. Remove any leeches which have become 
attached to the body, and cover the bite with a small sterile 
dressing. Oozing of blood may keep up for half an hour or 
longer after a leech has been removed, but this is not serious. 

■ 34. Animal Bites. — First aid for animal bites is the same 
as for wounds from other causes. 



37 



35 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



■ 35. Poisonous Plants. — a. General. — Poison ivy, poison 
oak, and poison sumac are the common plants that produce 
skin irritation. Poison ivy differs from other creepers of a 
somewhat similar appearance by having three leaves instead 
of five (fig. 39) . Poison oak is a shrub or small tree (fig. 40) . 
Poison sumac, also known as poison elder or dogwood, is a 
shrub or small tree (fig. 41) . The harmful part of these plants 
is the sap. Actual contact with the plant is not necessary 
as the sap can be carried on clothing, tools, hands, bodies of 
insects, or in smoke coming from fires burning the plants. 




Figure 39. — poison ivy. 



b. Control and first-aid measures. — (1) If possible wear 
gloves while working near any of these plants. 

(2) Wash, or expose to the sun for several hours, all cloth- 
ing, tools, or other implements which have been near the 
plants. 

(3) Wash with strong soap all parts of the body which have 
been exposed to the plants. The washing must be prompt 
and thorough, otherwise it will tend to spread the poison. 

(4) After a rash has developed, do not wash the affected 
parts. Avoid scratching; this makes the condition worse. 



38 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



35 




35 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



36 



■ 36. Removal of Foreign Bodies. — a. From the eye. — (1) 
Close the eye and allow tears to gather. Do not rub the eye. 
After a few minutes, open it again and the foreign body may 
be washed out by the tears. If the foreign body is under the 
lower lid, pull the lid down as shown in figure 42, have the 
person look up, and brush out the foreign body with the 
corner of a clean handkerchief. 

(2) If the foreign body is under the upper lid, hold the 
eyelashes of the upper lid with the index finger and thumb of 
one hand (fig. 43) ; place a match or pencil, held in the 
other hand, over the middle of the upper lid (fig. 44) ; then 
turn the lid over the match (fig. 45) and have the person 
look down. The foreign body may then be seen and removed 
with the corner of a clean handkerchief. 

(3) If the object cannot be easily wiped away from the 
eyeball or eyelid by brushing it with the corner of a hand- 
kerchief, close the eye and lightly apply a bandage. If a 
first-aid kit containing butyn with metaphen eye ointment is 
available, apply some of this ointment to the inner surface of 
the lower lid and cover the eye with an eye dressing as shown 
in figure 46, 

(4) When acids or strong alkalies get into the eye, hold 
the eyelids wide open and wash the eye with large amounts 
of water. Then apply butyn with metaphen eye ointment, if 
available, and cover the eye with an eye dressing. 

b. From the ear. — Never use pins or wire to remove ob- 
jects from the ear, as there is danger of seriously injuring 
the eardrum. Insects in the ear can usually be killed by 
dropping in a little oil; if no oil can be obtained, use water 
instead. If the foreign body is a bean or other object which 
will swell if it gets wet, do not put water in the ear. 

c. From the nose. — These usually are not dangerous. Try 
to remove the foreign body by gently blowing the nose. No 
attempt should be made to remove the object with forceps 
or wire; to do this usually causes swelling and jams the for- 
eign body tighter, 

&. From the throat. — If a foreign body in the throat can 
be reached with the finger, it may be picked or hooked out. 
See a medical officer at the earliest possible time. 

e. From the skin. — Splinters, pieces of grit, or other foreign 
bodies may be removed by picking them out with a sharp 



41 



38 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



36 




36-37 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



blade which has been sterilized by heating in a flame, or by 
means of the small forceps which are in some flrst-aid kits. 
Paint with iodine the area from which the splinter has been 
removed and then apply a sterile adhesive compress or other 
small bandage. As soon as possible after the flrst-aid re- 
moval of a foreign body, report the fact to a medical officer. 




Figure 46. — Eye dressing. 



■ 37. Drowning. — a. General. — Being under water for over 
5 minutes usually causes death, but an effort should always 
be made to revive a person who seems to be drowned unless 
it is known that the body has been under water for a very 
long time. Artificial respiration must be started as soon as 
possible after the person has been taken out of the water. 

b. Method of giving artificial respiration (see figs. 47 and 
48). — <1)' Lay or turn the drowned person face down. Force 
his mouth open, pull his tongue forward, and remove false 
teeth, vomitus, or debris from his mouth and throat. 



44 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 37 




Figure 47. — Prone pressure method of artificial respiration — 
first position. 




Figure 48. — Prone pressure method of artificial respiration — second 

position. 



515790 -—43 4 



45 



37 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



(2) Raise him by the hips to drain any water from his 
lungs, 

(3) Lay him face flown again, if possible at a nearby spot 
where his head will be lower than his feet. One of his arms 
should be extended above his head, the other should be bent 
at the elbow so that one side of his face can rest on his hand. 
(See fig, 47.) 

(4) Kneel astride the drowned person's thighs, with the 
knees far enough from his hips so that pressure can be made 
on his lower ribs. Place the palms of the hands on the 
small of his back with the fingers on his lower ribs, so that 
the little fingers just touch his lowest rib, the thumbs and 
fingers are in their natural position, and the tips of the 
Angers are out of sight just around the sides of his chest. 
The heels of the hands should be placed as far as possible 
from his backbone without slipping off (fig. 47), 

(5) With arms held straight, swing forward slowly so that 
the weight of the body is gradually brought to bear upon 
the drowned person. (See fig, 48,) This procedure should 
take about 2 seconds. Do not bend the elbows while giving 
artificial respiration. 

(6) Now immediately swing backward so as to remove 
all pressure completely and suddenly. Leave the hands in 
place if possible, 

(7) After about 2 seconds, repeat the procedure. The 
combined period of pressure and release should take about 
4 or 5 seconds and should be repeated 12 to 15 times a minute. 
Do not increase the cadence above 15 times per minute, 

(8) Keep up artificial respiration without stopping for 2 
hours or longer, unless the person to whom it is being given 
begins to breathe normally before then or is declared by a 
medical officer to be dead, 

(9) After artificial respiration has been started, the 
drowned person should if possible have his clothing loosened 
and he should be wrapped in a blanket or dry clothing, 

(10) When a drowned person regains consciousness, he 
should be kept lying down. Hot tea or coffee can be given 
as soon as complete consciousness has returned, 

(IV If breathing stops after it has once started begin 
artificial respiration again at once. 

(12) Because of the length of time that artificial respira- 



46 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



37-39 



tion may be necessary, more than one person may be required 
to give it. 

■ 38, Electrical Shock. — The rescue of a person from a live 
wire is always dangerous. If the switch is near, turn off the 
current, but do not lose time in looking for the switch. Use 
a dry pole, dry clothing, dry rope, or some other material 
which will not conduct electricity, when removing a person 
from a live wire (fig. 49). If a pole of some sort is not close 
at hand, a person in contact with a live wire can be dragged 




Figuee 48. — Bescue of a person Irom an electric wire. 



from the wire by means of a loop of dry cloth. Start artifi- 
cial respiration as soon as the person is freed from the wire. 
Early stiffening of the body is not always a sign of death ; keep 
up artificial respiration for 2 hours unless the person to whom 
it is being given begins to breathe normally before then or is 
declared by a medical officer to be dead. Electrical shock due 
to being struck by lightning is treated in the same manner as 
electrical shock due to a live wire. 

■ 39. Carbon Monoxide Poisoning. — Suffocation due to car- 
bon monoxide occurs most often from inhaling motor vehicle 
exhaust gas, or from being in a poorly ventilated tent or other 



47 



39-43 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



shelter in which a stove is burning. The first-aid measures 
for carbon monoxide poisoning are discussed in paragraph 72. 

■ 40. Fainting. — When a person who has fainted falls, it is 
usually best to let him lie quietly; loosen any tight clothing. 
If a person is about to faint or has actually fainted while 
sitting up, lower his head between his knees. 

■ 41. Unconsciousness. — a. General. — It is frequently im- 
possible to find out the cause of unconsciousness; always 
think of the possibility of bleeding, sunstroke, or injury to 
the head. 

b. First-aid measures. — Keep the person lying face down 
with his head turned to one side. If his skin is very warm 
and he might have heatstroke, give him first aid as described 
in paragraph 51a. If he is cold, keep him warm. Do not move 
the person unless absolutely necessary and then do so very 
carefully. Do not pour liquids into the mouth of an uncon- 
scious person; to do this may choke him. 

■ 42. Convulsions or Fits. — Convulsions may be due to many 
causes, including head injuries, epilepsy, poisoning, hysteria, 
and various illnesses. It is often difficult to find out the exact 
cause of convulsions. First aid for a person having convul- 
sions consists of loosening his clothes, keeping him from 
hurting himself while tossing about, and forcing a rolled 
handkerchief or towel or a stick between his teeth to keep 
him from biting his tongue. Do not use any more force than 
necessary to keep him from injuring himself. 

■ 43. Head Injuries. — a. General. — This is a term applied 
when a person has been "stunned" or "knocked out" by a blow 
on the head, or by being struck in the head by a bullet, shell 
fragment, or other missile. In severe head injuries the per- 
son cannot be awakened; there may be bleeding from the 
nose or ears; the breathing is deep and snoring; and there 
may be paralysis of part of the body. It is often impossible 
to tell how serious a head injury is. 

b. First-aid measures. — If the injured person is conscious, 
he should be laid fiat, with his head slightly raised. Unless 
a person with a head injury comes to in a few minutes, turn 
him face down, with his head turned to one side. He should 
be kept warm. No violent efforts should be made to wake 



48 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



43-48 



him up. Shaking his head or slapping his face and neck are 
dangerous things to do, because they make the injury worse. 

■ 44. Abdominal Pain. — Pain in the abdomen or "stomach 
ache" may be due to many causes, some of which are serious. 
Whenever there is pain in the abdomen, think of the possi- 
bility of appendicitis and remember that no food, only small 
sips of water, and no laxatives should be'taken. 

■ 45. Purification of Drinking Water. — a. Do not drink 
water which has not been declared safe, unless purified by 
one of tl!2 following methods: 

(1) Treat it with Halazone (water purification) tablets, 
using the tablets as directed on the container. 

(2) Boil it for 1 minute. 

b. Caution: Do not feel that ice or water flowing under ice 
is safe to drink without first treating ii with water -purifica- 
tion tablets or boiling it. 

■ 46. Care or the Feet. — a. Wash the feet with soap and 
water and change socks daily. After washing the feet, dry 
them carefully, especially the spaces between the toes; then, 
dust thoroughly with issue foot powder. 

b. If a blister appears, wash the blistered area with soap 
and water; then empty the blister by sticking it at the lower 
edge with a pin which has been passed through a flame. Do 
not remove the skin. Cover the emptied blister with ad- 
hesive plaster bandage. 

■ 47. Care of the Crotch. — Chafing of the inner sides of the 
thighs and of the scrotum can usually be prevented by wash- 
ing these parts every day, drying them thoroughly, and dust- 
ing with issue foot powder. If there is rawness, do not use 
the foot powder, but wash and thoroughly dry the parts 
daily. 

■ 48. Miscellaneous. — a. Poisonous weapon wounds. — Na- 
tives in some parts of the world put poison on the barbs of 
arrows and spears. First aid for wounds caused by poison 
arrow or spear wounds is the same as for snake bite. (See 
par. 29.) 

b. Poisonous fruits and drugs. — When a poisonous fruit or 
a poisonous drug has been swallowed, the important first-aid 
measure is to cause vomiting as soon as possible. Drink one 



49 



48-50 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



to two canteenfuls of water, preferably lukewarm and salty, 
as rapidly as possible, then tickle the throat with the finger as 
far down the throat as it will reach, to start vomiting. Re- 
peat these measures several times, then see that the person 
who has been poisoned keeps quiet and warm. 

c. Nosebleed. — Keep the person sitting up and quiet; 
loosen the collar, tie, or anything tight around the neck; 
have him breathe through his mouth and not blow his nose; 
if possible put something cold over the nose and against the 
back of the neck. 

Section V 

EFFECTS OP SEVERE HEAT AND MEASURES FOR USE 
IN THE DESERT 

■ 49. General. — Conditions caused by heat include burns on 
the surface of the body, and also the general body effects of 
heat such as heat stroke, heat exhaustion, and heat cramps. 
People who have lived for several years in very hot climates 
usually get along well in spite of the heat because they have 
gradually become conditioned and have learned how to take 
certain precautions about eating, drinking, dressing, and 
exercising. Although the general body effects of heat are of 
Special importance to desert and jungle troops, the possible 
bad effects of becoming overheated concern all troops, in- 
eluding those in the arctic, where overheating can result 
from wearing too many clothes while exercising. 

■ 50. Burns. — Burns may be caused by dry heat, hot liQuids, 
chemicals, or electricity. Overexposure to the sun can pro- 
duce very severe burns which require first-aid measures 
similar to those necessary for burns due to other causes. 
First aid for burns caused by acids, alkalies, or other com- 
mon chemicals, is discussed in b below. First aid for burns 
due to war gases is discussed in paragraph 69. Shock and 
infection are frequent complications of burns and require 
the same measures used for preventing or overcoming shock 
and infection caused by wounds. 

a. First-aid measures. — fl) Do not pull clothes from a 
burned part of the body; instead, cut or tear the clothes and 
then gently lift them off. Do not try to remove pieces that 
stick to the skin. 



50 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



50-51 



(2) Keep a burned person quiet and warm. 

(3) Do not break blisters which form following a burn. 

(4) Never apply iodine to a burn. 

(5) Do not touch a burn with dirty hands, clothes, or 
anything else unclean, 

<6) If a first-aid kit containing burn ointment is handy, 
apply boric acid, sulfadiazine, or other burn ointment, using 
the wooden paddle applicator to spread the ointment over the 
burn or onto the sterile dressings which are to be put on the 
burn. 

(7) When burned, take by mouth, along with a large 
amount of water, the eight sulfadiazine tablets (or the twelve 
sulfanilamide tablets found in some packets instead of sulfa- 
diazine tablets) which are in the sealed packet carried In 
the first-aid pouch attached to the cartridge belt. If sweat- 
ing has been great or if large amounts of water cannot be 
taken both with the drug and for 24 hours afterwards, no 
sulfadiazine or sulfanilamide tablets are to be taken. 

(8) If pain is very great, a dose of morphine may be given 
as described in paragraph 110 and shown in figure 97. 

(9) Whenever a burn covers a large area of the body, three 
or more canteenf uls of water to which salt has been added 
(two salt tablets or *4 teaspoonf ul of table salt to e ach can- 
teenf ul) should be taken every 24 hours. 

b. Acid, alkali, and other common chemical burns. — Burns 
caused by acids, alkalies, or other common chemicals should 
be washed with large amounts of water, lukewarm if pos- 
sible, until the chemical is completely removed; then spread 
boric acid, sulfadiazine, or other burn ointment, or sprinkle 
sulfanilamide over the burn, and apply a sterile dressing. 
■ 51. Heatstroke, Heat Exhaustion, ant Heat Cramps. — All 
these conditions are caused by heat, but differ in their symp- 
toms and in the first-aid measures needed for them. The 
general b_dy effects of heat can usually be prevented by 
avoiding unnecessary exposure to extreme heat; by keeping 
living and working quarters as cool as possible; by keeping 
the head and body covered when in the sun; by wearing 
light, loose fitting outer clothes; by taking plenty of salt 
with food, and by drinking enough water to which salt 
tablets have been added. The bad effects of overheating 
and sweating are less likely to happen If short rest periods 

51 



51 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



are taken during the heat of the day. It is better to drink 
small amounts of water frequently instead of large amounts 
all at once. Alcoholic and iced drinks, including ice water, 
should be avoided. Do not eat large, heavy meals. Eat 
sparingly during the heat of the day. Fruits and vegetables, 
preferably cooked, and fruit juices are good types of food 
in a hot climate. Avoid unnecessary physical exercise. 
Keeping the skin clean and free from dust and grease helps 
in the control of body heat. 

a. Heatstroke .(.also known as sunstroke). — (1) General. — 
Heatstroke is often caused by direct rays of the sun, but 
It can also happen even when a person has been under 
cover. The symptoms are headache, dizziness, irritability, 
seeing objects red or purple, : and sometimes vomiting; the 
skin is hot and dry; the face is flushed and there is high 
fever. The pupils of the eye? are usually very small. Un- 
consciousness usually occurs, and the body becomes limp; 
sometimes there may be convulsions. 

(2) First-aid measures. — Remove the person to a shady, 
cool place if possible, and remove all clothing except light 
underwear. Lay him on his back vith shoulders raised. 
Cool by sprinkling large amounts of cool water evenly over 
the body, and fanning continuously to cause rapid evapora- 
tion. Apply cool wet cloths to the head, changing them fre- 
quently. Briskly rub the arms, legs, thighs, and trunk. Do 
not overdo these things; stop every few minutes to note their 
effects. When the person is conscious give cool water con- 
taining two salt tablets to a canteenful of water. If the 
skin gets hot again, repeat the measures. 

b. Heat exhaustion. — (1) General. — The first signs of heat 
exhaustion are an "all in" feeling, dizziness, nausea, and 
unsteady walking. The face is pale, the skin is cold, and 
there is severe sweating. Fainting may occur,' The pupils 
of the eyes are usually very large. 

(2) First-aid measures. — Remove the person to a cool or 
Shady place, lay him on his back and have him drink three to 
five canteenfuls of cool salt water OA teaspoonful of table 
salt or two salt tablets to a canteenful of water) in a 12-hour 
period. 

c. Heat cramps. — (1) General — Heat cramps usually oc- 
cur after a person has been sweating a great deal, especially 



52 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



51-54 



if extra amounts of salt have not been taken. In this con- 
dition there are muscle cramps, especially of the legs and 
arms; the skin is cool, moist, and pale; breathing is shallow; 
frequently there is vomiting. There may also be severe 
weakness and dizziness. 

(2) First-aid measures. — Heat cramps can Usually be pre- 
vented by taking extra amounts of salt on days When sweat- 
ing a great deal. If cramps have already developed, rest 
In a cool place and take three to five canteenfuls of cool sa!t 
water OA teaspoon ful of table salt or two salt tablets to a 
canteenful of water) In a 12-hour period. 

■ 52. Eye Irritation. — a. General, — Glare from water or 
sand in bright sunlight often causes severe irritation of the 
eyes, as does also wind or blowing sand. Wear sand goggles 
whenever exposed to bright reflection from sand or water or 
when there are strong winds or blowing sand. 

b. First-aid measures. — Mild irritation of the eyes will us- 
ually clear up by simply protecting them from further ex- 
posure to bright light by the use of dark glasses. More 
severe irritation of the eyes can be relieved by the use of 
boric acid eye ointment, in addition to protection from light. 

Section VI 

EFFECTS OF SEVERE COLD, AND MEASURES FOR USE. 
IN THE ARCTIC 

■ 53. General. — In very cold weather first-aid measures may 
be needed for frostbite and freezing of various parts of the 
body, as well as for the general body effects of cold. These 
conditions can be caused by exposure to snow, ice, cold air, 
cold mud, or dampness. People who regularly live in cold 
climates seldom suffer very ill effects from cold, because 
they know how to protect themselves by proper dressing, 
eating and habits of living. 

■ 54. Frostbite and Freezing. — Frostbite and freezing are the 
terms applied to the effects of severe cold on various parts of 
the body. Although frostbite is less severe than complete or 
hard freezing of a part, it may cause very serious results. 
If any of the bad effects of cold should occur, it is very im- 
portant to recognize them and to know what to do at once, 
because delay in giving proper first aid may cause perma- 



53 



54 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



,nent injury. Frostbite and freezing may occur either grad- 
ually or suddenly, without the person being aware of it, unless 
certain precautions and warnings are kept in mind. 

o. Parts affected and methods of detecting. — (1) The parts 
of the body most often affected by frostbite and freezing 
are the feet, ears, nose, hands, cheeks, chin, and forehead. 
Frostbite and freezing may occur on parts of the body that 
are well covered as well as on exposed parts. 

(2) Men should frequently examine their own exposed 
parts and those of their companions for signs of the effects 
of cold. 

(3) A grayish or whitish waxy appearance of the skin is 
an early sign of freezing. Whenever any part of the body 
shows this sign, first-aid measures must be started at once, 

(4) Distinct pain is usually not present as a warning that 
frostbite or freezing is occurring. 

(5) Loss of feeling when the skin is touched is another 
important sign. 

(6) In very cold weather, by wrinkling the face from time 
to time, stiffness caused by freezing can be discovered. 

b. Protective measures. — (1) Wear enough of the proper 
clothes to keep comfortable, but do not wear more or heavier 
clothes than required, as this will only cause unnecessary 
weight and overheat the body. In very cold climates it Is 
frequently necessary to change the amount of clothing sev- 
eral times a day, depending on how much the person is 
moving about or exercising. 

(2) Many chilled hands and feet are due to overdressing 
with tight clothing that does not permit proper circulation of 
blood. Use only socks, shoes, and mittens or gloves which give 
plenty of room and make it possible to wiggle the fingers 
and toes. If leggings are being worn, do not lace them too 
tightly. Avoid the use of garments which fit tightly at the 
shoulder. Keep pack straps placed so that they do not press 
on the arms or under the armpits. During cold winds, 
protect the face by pulling a parka ■ hood or coat collar 
forward on the windward side, or by shielding the face 
with a gloved hand. 

(3) Avoid long exposure of bare hands and wrists. If the 
hands become extremely cold and stiff, it takes a 'long time; 
to get them back to normal. At temperatures below freezing, 

54 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



54 



mittens which do not separate the fingers are preferable. 

(4) Keep every part of the body dry at all times when in 
a cold climate. Damp or wet skin is much more likely to be- 
come frostbitten, and one of the most frequent causes of 
chilling and frostbite is wet clothing. Clothing may become 
wet from perspiration or melted snow. If clothing, socks, 
footgear, or gloves get wet from any cause, they must be 
dried or changed at once. Spare dry socks, insoles for boots, 
liners for mittens, and extra underclothes should always 
be carried. When exercising, even in very cold weather, it 
is possible to perspire a great deal; either shed some cloth- 
ing or open the clothing and remove the parka hood to 
allow air circulation so that the moisture of perspiration 
may escape. If this is not done, clothing becomes soaked 
with sweat. It then freezes stiff and becomes not only very 
uncomfortable, but may cause the person wearing it to 
suffer serious effects of cold. 

(5) Remember that overheating and sunburn can occur 
in snow country. 

(6) Do not touch cold metal such as a canteen cap or 
mouthpiece with the bare hands, tongue, or lips. The skin 
immediately freezes to such surfaces and, to be released, 
the metal should be warmed; otherwise the skin will be 
pulled off. Metal whistles and the mouthpieces of bugles 
must be carried in a pocket near the body so as to warm 
them before they are placed against the iips. 

(7) Do not eat snow or ice; to do this may cause freezing 
Of the lips and tongue. Snow or ice which is to be used 
to quench the thirst should be melted, by placing its con- 
tainer underneath warm clothes or over a fire. Melted ice 
or snow which is to be used for drinking purposes should 
be sterilized by boiling, or by using water purification tablets 
as described in paragraph 45. 

(8) Prevent freezing of the penis when urinating by pro- 
tecting it from the wind and afterwards by carefully button- 
ing the clothes. 

(9) Hot food and nonalcoholic drinks, at frequent inter- 
vals, are helpful. 

(10) In very low temperatures, deep and rapid breathing 
while exercising sometimes causes frosting of the lungs. Trie 
air entering the lungs will be less cold if a gloved hand is 



55 



54 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



held in front of the nose and mouth while breathing, or if 
the bottom of a parka hood is pulled forward so that the 
warm air near the body can be breathed. 

(11) Avoid any cramped positions which can interfere 
with circulation of the blood. 

(12) Do not wash too often, because skin from which all 
natural oil has been washed away freezes more easily. 

(13) It is usually best to keep moving while outdoors in a 
very cold climate. If, however, a strong wind is blowing, or 
especially if very tired, it is best to stop and rest, digging in- 
if possible. 

c. First-aid measures. — (1) Thaw a frostbitten or frozen 
part slowly, Thawing can be done best by applying the 
bared part to a warm part of the person's own body or to 
a warm part of the body of another person; and then cover- 
ing it with blankets or extra clothing. 

(2) Do not bring a frostbitten or frozen part close to a 
fire or anything hot. If a person who has been frostbitten Is 
brought indoors, the room into which he is brought should 
be only moderately warm. 

(3) If pain becomes too severe during or shortly after 
thawing, thawing should be slowed by exposing the part to 
cool air or water. 

<4) Wrap the person in warm blankets and give hot non- 
alcoholic drinks. 

(5) After thawing, keep the part at absolute rest and, if 
an arm or leg, slightly raised. A hand which has been frost- 
bitten or frozen should be carried in a sling. No weight 
should be borne on feet that have been frostbitten or frozen. 

(6) Do noi rub a frostbitten part and do not bend frozen 
limbs or ears, as this will cause further injury to the already 
damaged tissues. It is especially important not to rub or put 
snow or ice on a frostbitten or frozen part of the body, as 
this will increase the freezing. 

(7) In severe frostbite or freezing, even the gentlest mas- 
sage can do great harm. 

(8) After thawing, wrap the part lightly with sterile 
dressings, keep it at a reasonably cool temperature, and keep 
heavy covers from pressing on it. 

(9) Thawing is often very painful, especially if a part 
has frozen hard. The skin becomes red, or in severe cases, 

56 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



54-56 



violet. In time, blisters may appear; these may not show up 
until several days later and may be of great size. They 
should not be opened except under supervision of a medical 
officer. 

(10) Dust all blisters, open sores, or darkened areas of skin 
■with sulfanilamide and cover such areas with sterile dress- 
ings. 

■ 55. Wounds and Injuries. — a. When an accident happens 
in the cold, shock is very likely to occur, especially if there 
is considerable pain or severe bleeding. Prevent or overcome 
Shock by covering the injured person with a sleeping bag, 
extra clothing, blankets, or a tarpaulin; by applying heat to 
the chest, abdomen, or thighs; by keeping the head and upper 
part of the body lower than the legs and lower part of 
the body; and by giving warm nonalcoholic drinks. When 
available, chemical heating pads are good for warming a 
person, 

b. When using a tourniquet in very cold weather, be careful 
not to apply pressure for too long a time, otherwise freezing 
will result. Even tight bandages may dangerously reduce 
blood circulation, which is already below normal. If a tourni- 
quet is necessary, keep the part beyond the torniquet waim, 
but be very careful not to heat it above the normal body 
temperature. 

■ 56. Snow-Blindness.— ^. Genera I. — Snow-blindness is 
caused by the reflection of light from snow surfaces. It is 
most likely to occur on days when clouds are thick enough to 
hide the sun but not thick enough to produft heavy overcast 
weather. Snow glasses should always be worn during day- 
light. If no glasses or ready-made goggles are to be had, slit 
goggles may be made by cutting slits in a piece of cloth or 
paper (fig. 50) which can be fitted over the eyes. Blackening 
the skin around the eyes, including the sides of nose and 
cheek bone area, with the charred end of a stick also gives 
some protection against the glare. 

t>. Signs and symptoms. — The first symptoms of snow 
blindness are that the person who is developing it cannot 
see distinctly; actual blindness usually does not occur at 
once. Later, there is a burning sensation in the eyes, fol- 
lowed by severe eye pain. The pain may not begin until 



57 



56 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




Piouke fiO. — Improvised silt gaggles. 



several hours after exposure. The eyes become inflamed, 
and it may not be possible to use them for several days. 

c. First-aid measures. — Anyone who has had any symp- 
toms of snow blindness should be kept in a darlt place until 
the pain leaves. If there is no such place, a thick bandage 
should be placed over the eyes. Cold wet cloths or gauze 



58 



first aid for soldiers 



66-5.7- 



applied over the eyes will give some relief from the pain 
but this can only be done when there is no danger of freez- 
ing. If available, apply butyn and metaphen eye ointment, 
and then put on an eye dressing. 

■ 57. Carbon Monoxide Poisoning. — a. General. — (1) 
Among all the dangers of arctic operations, the danger of 
suffocation by carbon monoxide is one of the greatest. To 
troops coming to Arctic regions for the first time, the dis- 
comfort of cold is so great that common sense is often lost 
in an attempt to keep warm. Ia temporary shelters, stoves 
or fires should be used only for cooking and then shut off or 
put out unless it is certain that draft and ventilation is 
enough to carry oif the gases that form; clothing must be 
depended upon for warmth. If a stove is kept going even 
for a half hour in an improperly ventilated shelter, a dan- 
gerous amount of carbon monoxide may be generated. Car- 
bon monoxide is odorless, and will overcome a sleeping person 
without warning. 

(2) When a closed vehicle becomes stalled in the snow,' 
the engine is generally left running to keep the occupants 
warm and to avoid difficulty in again starting the motor. 
If snow drifts over the exhaust pipe and carbon monoxide 
fills the vehicle, the occupants may be overcome by the gas. 
When in a stalled vehicle, always keep the exhaust pipe 
open by getting out frequently and cleaning away the drifted 
snow. If alone, do not go to sleep in a closed car while the 
motor is running. It is possible to insure adequate ventila- 
tion without chilling, if windows on the lee side of a car 
are opened. If possible, at least two men should travel 
together in a vehicle, so that when rest is necessary they 
can take turns sleeping. When practicable, two or more 
vehicles should travel together. A lantern and a blanket 
will keep a person warm in a stalled vehicle, even in a bliz- 
zard of several days duration. Wrap the blanket around 
the body; light the lantern and place it between the feet. 

b. First-aid measures. — (1) Remove the cause. If a stove 
is burning or if a motor is running, turn it off. 

(2) Get outdoors or move the overcome person outdoors. 

(3) For persons who cannot get outdoors, secure proper 
ventilation Immediately and keep them quiet. 



59 



57-59 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



(4) Breathe evenly, and do not move about. 

(5) If a person has been overcome by carbon monoxide and 
Is not breathing, give artificial respiration as described in 
paragraph 37. 

(6) Once outside, to prevent freezing, it is important to 
cover with blankets or get into a sleeping bag. 

■ 58. Trench Foot; Shelter Foot; Immersion Foot. — These 
three conditions are practically the same and are very much 
like mild frostbite. They may occur, however, at much 
higher temperatures and usually result from standing still 
or sitting for long periods in a wet trench or shelter, or from 
hanging of the feet for a long time in water after ship wreck. 
Tight leggings and cramped positions of the legs increase the 
liability of the occurrence of these several conditions. They 
are best prevented by keeping the feet as dry as possible, and 
by frequently exercising the legs to increase the flow of blood. 
First-aid measures are the same as those for frostbite (par, 
54c) . 

Section VII 

MEASURES FOR USE IN THE JUNGLE AND TROPICS 

■ 59. Malaria. — a. Malaria is caused by the bite of certain 
mosquitoes which feed chiefly at night. For this reason, 
when in a mosquito infested country, sleep under a mosquito 
net. When out of doors at night protect yourself with leg- 
gings, a head net and gloves, and by rolling down the sleeves. 
Insect repellent furnished in jungle first-aid kits will help 
keep mosquitoes and other insects away. To apply insect 
repellent, turn bottle upside down and spread a small amount 
of liquid over exposed skin surfaces. One application will 
usually keep insects away for 2 hours. 

b. When in a place where there is malaria, atabrine will be 
taken for protection against the severe symptoms of malaria. 
Take the first dose (one tablet) in the morning, and the 
second dose (one. tablet) in the evening, after meals, on 2 
days of each week, skipping 2 or 3 days between the days of 
taking atabrine. Start taking atabrine on the first day spent 
in a malarial area and continue to take It as long as in the 
area. 

c. If quinine is in the jungle kit instead of atabrine, take 
two quinine tablets each day, as long as in a malarial area. • 



60 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



60-63 



■ SO. Dysentery. — Dysentery is* caused by impure drinking 
water or food, and is very likely to occur in the jungle unless 
certain precautions are taken. 

a. Prevention. — Dysentery may be avoided by purifying 
all drinking water in one of the ways described in paragraph 
45, and by eating only food which has just been cooked or 
taken from a sealed container. 

b. First-aid measures. — (1) If ill with dysentery, take only 
liquid foods and stay as quiet as possible until well. Add two 
salt tablets to each canteenful of drinking water if having 
an attack of dysentery. 

(2) In some of the first-aid kits there are sulfaguanadine 
tablets for the treatment of dysentery. Take four, tablets 
every 4 hours, day and night, until the bowel movements 
are normal. If there is no improvement in 4 days, stop 
taking the tablets. 

■ ■61. .Salt and Water Requirements.— The heat of tropical 
areas requires that special attention be paid to the amount 
of water and salt taken each day. " The methods of prevent- 
ing the bad eflects of heat and sweating, arid the habits which 
should be formed when in a hot climate are described in 
paragraph 51. If the suggestions given are followed, heat 
strolie, heat exhaustion, or heat cramps will be less likely to 
develop. , 

■ 62. Poisoned Bites and Wo'unds.— First-aid measures for 
snake and spider bites "are* giveri in : paragraphs 29 and 30; 
those for poison weapon wounds are given in paragraph 48. 

SECTION VIH 

MEASURES FOR USE IN AIRCRAFT AND TANK 
INJURIES 

■ 63. First Aid for Persons Injured in Aircraft. — In general, 
the same first-aid principles and measures apply to aircraft 
crew members and persons on the ground. Bombing missions 
are usually several hours in duration, and this makes it neces- 
sary that any immediate first aid must be given by a member 
of the combat crew while the airplane is in flight. All aircraft 
carry one aeronautical first-aid kit for each station in the 
airci-aft (par. 75). In addition, crews of combat air- 

5157B0— 43 5 61 



63 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



planes often carry additional dressings, triangular bandages, 
and improvised splints, as may be advised by the unit sur- 
geon. The jungle first-aid kit (par. 76) , and the Arctic first- 
aid kit (par. 78), which are specially designed for use in trop- 
ical and arctic areas, are carried in airplanes going over these 
regions. The parachute kit, which is attached to the para- 
chute harness, is a small first-aid kit to be used after a 
parachute landing (par. 74). 

a. Oxygen supply. — When flying at high altitudes, the per- 
son going to the aid of an injured crew member must first 
be sure that his own portable oxygen equipment is function- 
ing; there may be a bullet hole in the "walk-around" oxygen 
bottle. Upon reaching the Injured crew member, first be sure 
that his oxygen supply has not been cut off. If oxygen is not 
available death may come within a few seconds or within 2 
or 3 minutes, depending upon the altitude. If the injured 
person is suffering from shock or hemorrhage, special atten- 
tion should be given to the oxygen supply even at low alti- 
tudes; if a dilution-demand system is being employed, it may 
be necessary to shift to "auto-mix-off" at relatively low alti- 
tudes. If the oxygen supply of the injured person is damaged, 
a new supply must be provided, either from a walk-around 
bottle or by a new connection into the oxygen supply system. 
The injured person may be moved to a new location, where 
he can be fitted with a new oxygen mask; if this cannot be 
done, the airplane must drop to a lower level. If the injured 
person is unconscious, an open stream of oxygen may be 
played upon his face and artificial respiration given in order 
to revive him before moving. Wounded crew members are 
frequently flown directly to the nearest hospital after com- 
pletion of the mission. 

b. 'Air sickness. — Air sickness is particularly likely to fol- 
low injury. The development of air sickness will add to the 
discomfort of a wounded air crew member and may consti- 
tute a serious hazard. It may produce vomiting which will 
often interfere, with or entirely prevent the use of oxygen 
equipment. It is, therefore, important to take precautions 
to prevent air sickness. To do this, the person should be 
placed as near as possible to the center of gravity of the air- 
plane. If the air is rough, he should be fastened securely 
to prevent rolling and tossing. If possible, he should be 



62 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



63 



placed so that he can see outside the ship. All available 
measures should be taken to keep the person warm; hot 
drinks should be given and he should be well covered. As 
much ventilation as is consistent with warmth should be 
maintained. Leaning the head forward and keeping It in a 
fixed position in relation to the aircraft during turns and 
maneuvers is helpful. 

c. Removal of wounded and injured from airplanes. — CI) 
It is usually not difficult to remove an injured person from a 
nondisabled airplane. If the airplane is large enough and 
a litter is available, the person should be placed on it inside 
the airplane, Before this is done, however, make sure that 
the door is wide enough for the litter to be brought out flat. 
A parachute harness frequently can be used as a convenient 
means of support, if it is impossible to use a litter In removing 
a person from the airplane, as the straps of the harness 
furnish excellent hand holds. If several persons are present, 
one person should be responsible for supporting any injured 
limb, while the others take care of lifting the injured person 
from the airplane. 

(2) In the event of an airplane crash, remove the injured 
person from the crashed or wrecked airplane with the great- 
est possible speed and the least possible Injury and suffering 
to the injured person, regardless of the damage that may 
result to the airplane in the process. Whether the injury 
is due to a crash or to enemy gunfire, careful planning of 
removal Is necessary in order to avoid additional injury. If 
there is no Are hazard, it is advisable to apply first aid before 
attempting removal, especially the use of splints and meas- 
ures for the relief of pain, including morphine if necessary. 

(3) The fear of fire frequently has resulted in persons 
being removed with unnecessary haste and lack of care. If 
fire is to result from the crash, it usually will start before 
the aircraft can be reached or within a period of about 5 
minutes. If fire appears probable, all efforts should be di- 
rected toward immediate removal of the injured. The pres- 
ence of live ammunition and bombs will influence the speed 
of the action and determine whether drastic measures must 
be undertaken. 

(4 ) It is well to direct the fire extinguisher on any danger 
area where fire is likely to break out. All members of the 



63 



63~«4 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



airplane crew and of the crash crew should be familiar with 
the operation and use of carbon dioxide and other fire ex- 
tinguishers. Because of the danger of igniting spilled gaso- 
line, cigarettes, exposed lights, matches, or other open fire 
should not be allowed near damaged aircraft under any 
circumstances, 

(5) To remove an injured man from a cockpit type air- 
plane, arrange the available men two on one side of the 
cockpit and any others on the opposite side. Make certain 
that each man has a firm footing .either on the wing, on 
boxes, on the back end of the ambulance or truck, or on 
some other solid support. Be certain that the safety belt, 
which holds the man in his seat, has been unfastened, as 
failure to do this may result in very serious injury. Be sure 
that no part of the injured person or persons is trapped or 
caught by some portion of the airplane. If the injured is 
bo trapped, that portion of the airplane resting against the 
body must be cut away with an ax, shears, or a hacksaw. 

(6) If the airplane has been crushed so that the wounded 
person cannot be immediately released, give such first aid 
as can be given in the airplane, make him as comfortable 
as possible, and then take steps to release him. Be sure to 
place some protection between the injured person and the 
structures that are to be cut by torch, as, or other cutting 
tools, in order to avoid additional injury. Be sure that the 
injured person is supported so that he does not fall and 
sustain further injury when the part of the airplane pinning 
him is removed. This is especially applicable when the plane 
has ground-looped and the crew member is suspended by 
his safety belt. 

■ 64. First Aid for Persons Jnjubed in Tanks. — First-aid 
measures for persons injured in tanks must often be given 
Very hurriedly, or delayed until removal of the person from 
the tank has been accomplished. Whenever the situation 
permits, tank casualties who are suffering much pain should 
be given an injection of morphine, should be kept warm, and 
should be moved as little as possible, evacuation being ac- 
complished at the rallying point. If practicable, wounds 
should be dressed and simple splinting such as tying an 
injured leg to the uninjured leg, should be done before 



64 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



6't-66 



evacuation from the vehicle. When there are severe in- 
juries which will cause the person to suffer much pain during 
his removal Irom the tank, an injection of morphine should 
be given before he is removed, unless morphine has been 
given within the last 2 hours (see par. 10) . Removal can be 
accomplished either with or without the aid of belt straps, 
slings, harness, or other special equipment, always being 
very careful to avoid causing further injury during 
evacuation. 

Section IX 

TRANSPORTATION OF THE SICK AND INJURED 

■ 65. General. — Correct transportation of a seriously in- 
jured person is one of the most important parts of first aid. 
Careless or rough handling can increase the seriousness of 
an injury and may even cause death. Whenever possible, 
give whatever first aid is needed before moving an injured 
person. If there is no absolute need for moving him at once, 
it is usually best to let him stay where he is until he can be 
moved by litter, ambulance, or some other means. Unless 
he is already overheated, an injured person should be kept 
warm both while waiting to be moved and during transporta- 
tion. 

■ 66. Without Litters. — Sometimes situations require trans- 
portation without litters or other equipment. If this should 
be necessary it can be done by one or another of several 
ways. 

a. Movement by one bearer. — Movement of an injured 
person by a single bearer may be done by the fireman's carry 
(figs. 51 to 57, incl.) , supporting carry (fig. 58) , arms carry 
(fig. 59), saddle-back carry (Sg. 60), pack -strap carry (fig. 
61) or fireman's drag (fig. 62). The first three steps of the 
fireman's carry, illustrated in figures 51, 52, and 53 are also 
preliminary steps to the accomplishment of other carries 
listed in this paragraph with the exception of the fireman's 
drag. 

b. Movement by two bearers. — Movement of an injured 
person by two bearers may be done by the supporting carry 
(fig. 63), arms carry (fig. 64), saddle-back carry (fig. 65), 
or pack-saddle carry (figs. 66 and 67), 



65 



6G 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 




66 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



66 




BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




Figuhb 56. — Fireman's carry — sixth step. 



70 



1-IKSX AID FOR SOLDIERS 



66 




BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



66 




66 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIESI AID FOR SOLDIERS 



66 




BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




Picube 62. — Fireman's drag. 



76 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



66 




Fig toe 63. — Supporting carry — two bearers. 



615790° — 43 6 77 



66 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




66 



BASIC FlEtD MANUAL 




80 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



67 




Pkstjue 67. — Pack-saddle carry — close-up. 



■ 67. With Improvised Loiters. — a. Many objects and ma- 
terials may be used to make improvised litters in an 
emergency. 

b. The usual way to make a litter is with a blanket or shel- 
ter tent, and poles about 7 feet long, as shown in figures 68, 
69, and 70. 

(1) The blanket is spread on the ground. 

(2) One pole is laid across the center of the blanket which 
is theti folded over it. 

(3) The second pole is placed across the center of the new 
fold. 

(4) The blanket is folded over the second pole as over the 
first. 

(5) The free end of the blanket is fixed. 

c. A litter can be prepared by turning two or three blouses 
inside out and buttoning them up, sleeves in, then passing 



81 



67 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOH SOLDIERS 




67 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



poles through the sleeves, the backs of the blouses forming 
the bed, as shown in figure 71, 

d. Camp cots, window shutters, doors, benches, ladders, 
boards, or poles, tied together and preferably padded, serve 
well as litters. 

e. Litters can be made by ripping the bottoms or cutting 
off the corners of sacks, bags, or bedticks, then passing two 
poles through them and tying crosspieces to the poles to keep 
them apart. 




Figure 72. — Rolled blanket used as a litter. 



/. A shelter half, a blanket, a piece of matting, or a piece 
of carpet can be fastened to poles by tacks or twine to make 
a litter. 

g. Rope or wire can be woven between poles and this net- 
work covered with a blanket. 

h. If no poles can be had, a blanket, rolled from two sides 
and supported as shown in figure 72, can be used as a litter. 

i. In snow country, sleds will serve as a litter; if a regular 
sled is not available, skis can be fastened together to serve 
the same purpose. 



84 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



68-69 



Section X 
WAR, GASES 

■ 68. General. — a. The combat soldier, even if in an isolated 
area, can either protect himself against gas attack or give 
himself first aid for gas exposure with the following equip- 
ment: 

(1) A gas mask, 

(2) Protective clothing. 

(3) Protective ointment M-4, with its cellulose paper- 
packing. 

(4) A piece of ordinary soap. 

(5) A canteenful of water. 

(6) A handkerchief for wetting burning phosphorous 
particles. 

(7) A knife for cutting away contaminated clothing or 
scraping phosphorous particles from bxirns. 

b. For those soldiers who may be cailed upon to use more 
elaborate gas casualty equipment, a list of- the contents of 
the special gas casualty first-aid kit is given in paragraph 
79. Directions for the use of the contents of this kit are given 
in paragraphs 85, 94, 96, 97, 99, 101, 106, 112, and 113. 

■ 69. Protective and First-Aid Measures. — a. Gas mask. — 
A gas mask gives protection for the eyes, the breathing pass- 
ages, and that part of the face covered by the mask. A gas 
mask should be worn whenever a person is exposed to any 
war gas. 

b. Vesicant agents. — (1) Protective clothing will protect 
the skin against the vapors and small droplets of vesicant 
agents. 

(2) Protective ointment M-4 will prevent blistering if used 
within J or 2 minutes after contamination of the skin with 
liquid mustard or lewisite. Protective ointment is to be used 
as follows, if a part of the body becomes contaminated with 
a vesicant agent in liquid form: 

(a) Use quickly, within 1 to 2 minutes from the time of 
exposure. If redness has already developed, do not use 
protective ointment because at this stage protective ointment 



85 



69 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



is harmful, and thorough washing with water or, better still, 
soap and water, is the best thing to do. 

(fc>) Tear off small pieces of the cellulose, packing material, 
used to wrap the tube of ointment, and blot dry (dab, do not 
rub) any liquid vesicant agent which may be on the skin. 
Use a fresh piece of the packing material for each dabbing to 
avoid spreading the chemical agent. 

(c) Unscrew the cap of the tube, reverse it, and use it to 
punch a hole in the seal of the tube. Squeeze some ointment 
on a piece of the packing material and rub the ointment into 
the contaminated area for about 20 seconds. 

(i2) Use a clean piece of packing material to wipe off any 
ointment which is left on the skin. Repeat this procedure, 
using fresh amounts of ointment two or three times, wiping 
off the extra ointment before each new application. 

(e) After 10 to 20 minutes, wash away any remaining 
ointment, using soap and water if possible. 

(3) Any vesicant agent which gets into the eye must be 
washed away at once with large amounts of water. The 
cap of a canteen can be used as an eye cup, but in addition 
the upper eyelids should be lifted and flushed well with water. 
Flushing of the eye within the first minute or two after 
exposure is worth weeks of treatment later. 

(4) Ordinary clothing contaminated with vesicant agents 
should be removed as early as possible. Protective clothing 
need be removed only if it is contaminated with large drops 
or splashes of vesicant agents. 

C. White phosphorous. — Burning pieces of phosphorous on 
the clothing or skin are to be smothered with a wet handker- 
chief, and the phosphorous cut from the clothing or scraped 
from the skin. 

d. Tear gas (lacrimators) . — (1) Put on the mask. Squeeze 
the outlet valve with the Angers and breathe out forcibly 
one or two times to clear the facepiece of gas. Then keep 
the eyes open as much as possible. The flow of tears and 
the purified air will quickly rid the eyes of the irritating gas. 

(2) Liquid tear gas should be washed out "of the eye with 
water, or from the skin with soap and water. The clothing 
must be aired or washed before being worn again. 

e. Irritating smoke (sternutators) CD Put on the gas 

mask as soon as gas is detected, and keep it on continuously 

86 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



69-71 



unless it must be lifted away just long enough to vomit. 
Although there may be many disagreeable symptoms, includ- 
ing headache, nausea and vomiting, sneezing, and a burning 
sensation in the nose and throat, the effects of this gas are 
not really dangerous. 

<2> When the situation permits, rinse nose, throat, and 
eyes with water, and rest in the shade until the worst symp- 
toms have passed. Recovery is usually rapid after an hour 
or so. Air the clothing, and if any part of the skin feels 
irritated, wash it with soap and water. 

/. Lung irritants. — The immediate use of the gas mask is 
of great importance in protection against these gases. If 
not enough gas has been breathed in to cause any noticeable 
effects, it will do no harm to carry on with the mission. If- 
tightness in the chest, coughing, or easy exhaustion appear, 
absolute rest, warmth and evacuation for medical treatment 
are necessary. Smoking of tobacco in any form after ex- 
posure to this gas is very dangerous and must be avoided. 

Section XI 

DESCRIPTION OP FIRST-AID KITS AND PACKETS 

■ 70. General. — In this section various first-aid kits or 
packets and their contents are described. Some are sup- 
plied to the individual soldier; others are made available to 
certain groups of the armed forces, by being placed in ve- 
hicles or airplanes. First-aid kits and packets vary in their 
contents according to the requirements of the troops to whom 
they are supplied. 

■ 71. Individual Equipment. — a. Fivst-aid packet, carried in 
web pouch attached to cartridge belt (figs. 73 and 74), con- 
tains — 

(1) Wound dressing (1). 

(2) Sulfanilamide (5 grams) in sterile, individual, double- 
wrapped shaker-top envelope (1). 

b. Sulfadiazine (or sulfanilamide) packet, carried in web 
pouch attached to cartridge belt (figs. 75 and 76) , contains 
8 sulfadiazine tablets (0.5 gram each), or 12 sulfanilamide 
tablets (0.5 gram each). 



87 



71 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




FIRST AID FOR SOLDIEHS 



71 




71-72 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



e. Protective ointment (M-4) packet carried in gas mask 
carrier (fig. 77) contains — 

(1) Tube of protective ointment M-4. 

(2) Cellulose packing material. 




Figure 77. — Protective ointment M-t and cellulose packing material. 

■ 72. Motor Vehicle First-Aid Kit (12-Unit) (figs. 78, 79) . — 
This kit, supplied to motor vehicles, usually one to every 
fourth vehicle, contains — 

a. Burn injury set (boric acid ointment or 5 percent sul- 
fadiazine ointment and wooden applicator) (2).- 

b. Eye dressing set (1), consisting of — 

(1) Two-inch eye pads. 

(2) Double strip adhesive plaster packets. 

(3) Tube of boric acid ointment. 

(4) Tube of butyn sulfate and metaphen ophthalmic 
Ointment. 

e. Iodine swabs (1 package). 

d. Sulfanilamide (5 grams) in sterile individual double 
wrapped envelope with shaker top (6). 

e. Adhesive compresses, 1 by 3 inches (16). 
/. Bandage compress, 4 by 4 inches (1), 

90 



72-73 



Basic field manual 



g. Bandage compress, 2 by 2 inches (1). 

h. Gauze bandage, 4 inches by 6 yards (1). 

i. Triangular bandage (1). 

j. Tourniquet-scissors-forceps set (1). 
k. Ammonia inhalants (10). 
I. Safetypins (10). 

to. Morphine tartrate syrettes grain) (may be added 
to this kit upon direction of the commanding officer when 
the military circumstances indicate its need). 

■ 73. Motor Vehicle First-Aid Kit (24 Unit) (figs. 80 and 
81) . — This kit, supplied to motor vehicles, usually one to every 
armored vehicle, including half-track vehicles, contains — 

a. Burn injury set (boric acid ointment or 5 percent sul- 
fadiazine ointment and wooden applicator) (4). 

b. Eye dressing set (2), consisting of — 
(1) Two -inch eye pads. 




Pro-eras 80. — Motor vehicle flrst-aid tit (24-unlt) — outside view. 

92 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



73 



(2) Double strip adhesive plaster packets. 

(3) Tube of boric acid ointment. 

(4) Tube of butyn sulfate and metaphen ophthalmic 
ointment, 

c. Iodine swabs (.1 package). 

d. Sulfanilamide (5 grams) in sterile individual double 
wrapped envelope with shaker top (12). 




Picdms 81. — Motor veJdicle first-aid kit (24-unit) — opened. 



515790° — 43 7 93 



73-76 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



e. Adhesive compresses, 1 by 3 inches (16). 
/. Bandage compress, 4 by 4 inches (3). 

g. Bandage compress, 2 by 2 inches (2>. 

h. Gauze bandage, 4 inches by 6 yards (1). 

i. Triangular bandage (1). 

j: Tourniquet-scissors-forceps set <1). 

k. Ammonia inhalants (10). 

I. Safetypins 1.10). 

m. Large wound dressing (2). 

n. Morphine tartrate syrette <.y 2 grain) (may be added to 
this kit upon direction of the commanding officer when the 
military circumstances indicate its need). 

■ 74. Parachute First- Aid Packet (figs. 82 and 83). — This 
packet, supplied to each parachute wearer, contains — 

a. Tourniquet (1). 

b. Wound dressing (1). 

c. Morphine tartrate syrette (Y s -grain) (1), 

■ 75. Aeronautic First-Aid Kit (figs. 84 and 85). — This kit, 
Supplied to aircraft, one to each aircraft station, contains — 

a. Scissors (1) . 

ft. Wound dressings (3). 

c. Burn injury set (boric acid ointment or 5 percent sul- 
fadiazine ointment and wooden applicator) (1) . 

d. Eye dressing set (1), consisting of — 

(1) Two-inch eye pads. 

(2) Double strip adhesive plaster packets. 

(3) Tube of boric acid ointment. 

(4) Tube of butyn sulfate and metaphea ophthalmic 
ointment. 

e. Halazone (water purification) tablets (iia-grain) (100). 
/. Sulfadiazine tablets (0.5-gram) (8). 

g. Morphine tartrate syrettes -grain) (2). 

h. Sulfanilamide (5 grams) in sterile individual double 
wrapped envelope with shaker top (6). 

i. Tourniquet (1). 

j. Iodine swabs (1 package). 
k. Adhesive compresses (16). 

■ 76. Jungle Pirst-Aid Kit (Large) (figs. 86 and 87) . — This 
kit, supplied to aircraft going over jungle areas, contains — 



94 




95 



76-77 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



a. Aspirin (acid, acetylsalicylic) tablets (5-grain) (150). 

b. Aloin compound tablets (200). 

c. Atabrine tablets (0.1-gram) (100). 

d. Sodium bicarbonate and peppermint tablets (2 con- 
tainers of 200 each) . 

e. Halazone (water purification), tablets (Vie-grain) (2001. 
/. Insect repellent (12 bottles, 2^ oz. each). 

g. Suction kit for snake bite (1). 

h. Iodine swabs (4 packages of 10 swabs) . 

i. Salt tablets (10-gxain) (100). 




Figure 84. — Aeronautic first-aid kit — outside view. 



j. Morphine tartrate syrettes (^2 -grain) (2 packages ot 
12 syrettes) . 

k. Sulfadiazine tablets (0.5-gram) (12 containers of 8 
tablets) . 

I. Sulfaguanidine tablets (0.5-gram) (90). 

m. Adhesive compresses (5 packages of 16 each). 

■ 77. Jungle First -Aid Kit ^Individual) (figs. 88 and 89) . — 
This kit supplied to each soldier in jungle areas and carried 



96 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



77-78 



in a compartment of the jungle pack (waterproof rucksack) , 
contains — 

a. Aspirin Cacid, acetyls alicy lie) tablets (5-grain) (24). 
o. Atabrtae tablets (0.1-gram) (30). 

c. Halazone (water purification) tablets (Mo-grain) (200). 

d. Insect repellent (1 oz.) . 

e. Packet, first-aid (1) . 
/. Foot powder (2 oz.) . 




Figure 85. — Aeronautic flist-aid kit — opened. 



g. Solution for athlete's foot (Frazer's solution) (1 oz,). 

h. Iodine (2%) (2 cc). 

i. Salt tablets (10-grain) (100) . 

j. Sulfadiazine tablets (0.5-grain) (8). 

k. Adhesive compresses (16). 

I. Adhesive plaster (1 inch X 5 yards) (1 spool). 

■ 78. Arctic First-Aid Kit (flgs. 90 and 91 ) . — This kit, sup- 
plied to aircraft going over Arctic areas, contains — ■ 
a. Aspirin (acid, acetylsalicyllc) tablets (5-grain) (150). 



97 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



Figure 86. — Jungle first-aid kit — outside view. 



Figure o7. — Jungle first-aid kit — opened. 
98 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



78 



b. Aloin compound tablets (200). 

c. Sodium bicarbonate and peppermint tablets (200). 

d. Halazone (water purification) tablets (Vm-grain) (200). 

e. Vitamins (multivitamin capsules or tablets) (300). 



Figure Bfl. — Jungle first-aid kit (individual) — rolled, in. a bag. 

/. Boric acid ointment (1 oz.). 

g. Bismuth subcarbonate tablets (5 -grain) (200). 

h. Ammoniated mercury ointment, U. S. P. (1 oz.). 

i. Silver protein, mild, tablets (4%o grains) (100). 
j. Sulfadiazine tablets (0.5 -gram) (96). 



99 



78-79 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



k. Sulfaguaniadine tablets (0.5 gram) (90). 
I Foille (%-oz. tubes) (6). 
m. Cotton, absorbent, compressed (1 oz.). 
n. Iodine swabs (20). 

o. Morphine tartrate syrettes (^-grain) (24). 
p. Sulfanilamide (5 grams) in sterile individual double 
wrapped envelope with shaker top (12). 
q. Adhesive compresses (32). 
r. Adhesive plaster (1 inch x 5 yards) (1 spool). 
s. Salt tablets (10-grain) (100). 
t. Bandage, gauze (4-inch) (9). 




Picube 89. — Jungle first-aid kit (Individual) — opened. 



■ 79. Gas Casualty First -Aid Kit (figs. 92 and 93). — This 
kit, supplied in the theater of operations on the basis of one 
to each 25 individuals, and usually carried in vehicles, con- 
tains — 

a. Dichloramine-T in triacetin. * 

b. Hydrogen peroxide solution (8%), 

c. Copper sulfate solution (10%). 

d. Eye and nose drops. 

e. Eye solution M-l. 



100 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



ARCTIC 



Figure 90. — Arctic first-aid kit — outside view. 




FiGtntE 91. — Arctic first-aid kit — opened. 
101 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



79-80 



/. Cotton pads. 
g. Amy! nitrite. 

ft, Pontocaine compound ointment. 
i. Protective ointment M-^. 

■ BO. Parachute First-Aid Kit (Prying Pan Insert) , Type 
B-4 (figs. 94 and 95) . — This kit is found in emergency jungle 
kit attached to seat of parachute, and issued one per 
parachute in tropical countries. 




Figure 94. — Parachute first- aid kit (frying pan Insert), Type B^i. 

a. Medical components. 

(1) Atabrine tablets (0.1-gram) (12). 

(2) Iodine swabs (6). 

(3) Sulfanilamide (5 grams) in sterile individual double- 
wrapped envelope with shaker top (1). 

(4) Salt tablets (iO-grain) (8). 

(5) Water purification (Halazone) tablets 0/jc-grain) <30), 

(6) Bandage gauze compress 2 by 2 inches (2) . 

(7) Adhesive compress (6). 

(8) Boric acid ointment (1). 

(9) Sulfadiazine tablets (0.5-gram) (8). 

(10) Benzedrine tablets (5-mgm) (6>. 

b. In addition to medical components the following items 
are also contained in this kit: 

(1) Curved needle with thread (1). 

(2) Soap, cake, hotel size (1). 

(3) Tea, tablets, compressed (10). 



103 



81-84 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 




Figubb 95. — Emergency jungle kit, containing paracbute first-aid kti 
(frying pan insert) . 



Section XII 

USES OF CONTENTS OP FIRST-AID KITS 
AND PACKETS 

■ 81. General. — The uses of the materials and pieces of 
equipment contained in one or another of the first-aid kits 
or packets which a soldier may be called upon to use in an 
emergency are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 

■ 82. Alow Compound Tablets. — As a laxative. Take- one 
or two tablets at night, if constipated. 

■ 83. Ammonia, Aromatic, Inhalant. — Fox* fainting, crush and 
hold near nose as directed on container. 

■ 84. Ammoniated Mercury Ointment (Mercuric Ointment, 
Ammoniaied) . — For mild skin infections. Spread thinly 
over affected areas. Caution: Do not apply if iodine has 
already been used. 



104 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



85-89 



■ 85. Amyl Nithite. — For use after exposure to hydrocyanic 
acid gas (HCN) . Break container in piece of cloth and 
inhale fumes. Repeat three times if necessary. 

■ 86. Aspirin (Acid Acetylsalicylic) Tablets (5-Grain). — 
For slight aches or pain. Take one to two tablets repeating 
not oftener than every 3 hours, as needed. Do not take more 
than 12 tablets in 24 hours. 

■ 87. Atabrine Tablets (0.1-Gram) .—For prevention of 
symptoms of malaria. Take first dose (one tablet) in morn- 
ing and second dose (one tablet) in evening, after meals, 
on 2 days of each week; skip 2 or 3 days between the days of 
taking atabrine. Start to take atabrine on the first day spent 
in a malarial area and continue to take it as long as located in 
the area. 

■ 88. Bandages and Dressings. — a. Wound dressing (dressing, 
first-aid, Carlisle, small) . — For dressing medium sized wounds. 

b, Wound dressing, large (dressing, first-aid, Carlisle, 
large.) — For dressing large wounds. 

c. Bandage, gauze compress 4 by 4 inches. — For dressing 
small wounds. 

- d. Bandage, gauze compress 2 by 2 inches. — For dressing 
small wounds. 

e. Adhesive compress (bandage, gauze, adhesive) . — For 
quick dressing of small cuts, scratches, or blisters. 

/. Bandage, triangular. — For making slings and for band- 
aging wounds or injuries requiring a large dressing, It can 
also be used as a tourniquet and for holding splints in place. 

fir. Eye dressing. — For dressing eye wounds, or an eye with 
a foreign body in it. 

h. Bandage, gauze, 4 inches by 6 yards. — For holding dress- 
ings or splints in place. 

■ 89. Benzedrine Tablets (5-Mgm) — For relief of ex- 
treme mental fatigue take one tablet, This dose may be 
repeated at intervals of every 6 hours, if needed. A total of 
only three such doses should be taken in 1 week except under 
operations of extreme length when up to six such doses may 
be used. For the relief of physical fatigue, take two tablets. 
This dose may be repeated at intervals of every 6 hours, if 
needed. Never take a total of more than three such doses 
within a period of 1 week. 



105 



90-100 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



■ 90. Bismuth Sdbcarbonaie Tablets (5-Grahj). — For severe 
diarrhea. Take 4 to 6 tablets, three to four times daily until 
diarrhea stops. 

■ 91. Boric Acid Ointment (Acid, Boric, Ointment). — For 
bums, windburn, and chafing. Spread thinly over affected 
area. 

■ 92. Burn, Injury Set (Sulfadiazine Ointment (5%); or 
Boric Acid Ointment; Wooden Applicator) . — Use wooden ap- 
plicator to spread ointment evenly over burned surfaces or 
onto dressing which is to be applied to these surfaces. 

■ 93. Compresses. — See paragraph 88. 

■ 94. Copper Sulfate Solution (10%). — For phosphorus 
burns. Cover burns with cotton pads wet with copper sul- 
phate solution. Then remove coated phosphorus particles 
with forceps. Caution: Do not use in eyes. 

■ 95. Cotton, Absorbent, Compressed. — For plugging ear 
canals to protect against cold and wind, also as protection for 
eardrums. 

■ 96. Cotton Pads. — For removal of liquid vesicant agents,, 
and for application of gas decontaminating solutions. 

■ 97. Dichloramtne-T In Triacetin. — For liquid mustard on 
skin. Blot skin dry. Dab cotton pad, dampened with solu- 
tion, repeatedly on contaminated area. Caution: Do not use 
in eyes. 

■ 98. Dressings. — See paragraph 88. 

■ 99. Eye and Nose Drops. — For relief of pain and conges- 
tion in eyes and nose, trse one or two drops in eye or two 
drops in nostril. Apply as often as needed. 

■ 100. Eye Dressing Set (2-Inch Eye Pads; Double-Strip 
Adhesive Plaster Packets; Boric- Acid Ointment; Butyn 
Sulfate and Metaphen Ophthalmic Ointment). — For eye dis- 
comfort caused by exposure to wind or due to dust getting 
into eyes, squeeze a small amount of boric acid ointment onto 
the inner surface of the lower lid. If there is severe eye pain 
due to a foreign body which is not easily removed, apply a 
small amount of butyn sulfate and metaphen ophthalmic 



103 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



100-1 10 



ointment onto the inner surface of the lower lid and cover 
the eye with an ey« pad held in place by strips of adhesive. 
Caution: Do not rub the eye. 

■ 101. Eye Solution M-l. — For lewisite in eyes. Open eye, 
using gentle force if necessary. Drop two to four drops into 
eye. Apply a little solution to eyelids. Caution: Apply only 
once. 

■ 102. Foille. — For burns or frostbite. Spread evenly over 
injured surface or onto dressings which are to be applied 
to these surfaces. Since in cold climates the temperature of 
Foille may become extremely low without the ointment 
solidifying, care must be taken before it is applied to be sure 
that the ointment is warmed to near body temperature, 
otherwise it may cause further harm to the burned or frost- 
bitten part of the body. 

■ 103. Foot Powder. — For protection of the feet, and for 
athlete's foot. Wash the feet; dry thoroughly; apply foot 
powder, especially to soles of feet and between toes. 

■ 104. Forceps. — For removing gravel, splinters, and other 
foreign bodies from wounds. 

■ 105. Halazone. — See paragraph 127. 

■ 106. Hydrogen Peroxide Solution (8?! ). — For liquid lewis- 
ite on skin. Blot skin dry. Dab cotton pad dampened with 
solution repeatedly on contaminated area. Caution: Do not 
use in eyes. 

■ 107. Insect Repellent. — For keeping away insects. Turn 
bottle upside down and spread a small amount of the liquid 
Over exposed skin surfaces. 

■ 108. Iodine Applicator. — For application to small scratches. 

■ 109. Iodine Swabs. — For sterilization of the skin around a 
wound. Remove cap from applicator; crush wrrfre marked 
"Crush here," Applyto edges of wountfaiwlsurrouiidlng skin. 
Do not apply to wound itself. 

■ 110. Morphine Tartrate Syrette (^-Grain) . — For the re- 
lief of severe pain. Remove transparent head of morphine 
syrette. Grasp wire loop and push wire in to pierce inner seal, 
turning if necessary. Take care not to touch needle with 



107 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



110-118 



fingers or any other object. Pull out and discard wire, thrust 
needle through skin at least half its length, and inject solu- 
tion by slowly squeezing syrette from the sealed end as shown 
in figure 97. That part of the body which can be most 
quickly and easily exposed, such as the loose skin of the 
abdomen, the thigh, or the upper arm, should be used for the 
place of injection. Caution: The full effects of morphine 
are not felt for 20 to 30 minutes after injection. A second 
injection for continued severe pain should not be given sooner 
than 2 hours after the first. Never give a second dose of 
morphine to a person who is breathing 12 or less times a 
minute. Never give morphine to an unconscious person. 

■ 111. Plaster, Adhesive CI Inch »y 5 Yards) . — For holding 
on dressings. 

■ 112. Pontocaine Compound Ointment. — For relief of itch- 
ing or pain caused by vesicant agents (war gases). Apply to 
burned skin and gently rub in. 

■ 113. Protective Ointment M-4. — For liquid vesicants (war 
gases) on skin. Blot skin dry. Apply ointment with cotton 
pad and rub in for 20 seconds; remove ointment; repeat 
application, rubbing in and then removing ointment, three or 
four times. 

■ 114. Safetypins. — For fastening dressings and slings. 

■ 115. Salt Tablets (10 -Grain). — For prevention of heat 
cramps and heat exhaustion. Also to be added to drinking 
water if suffering with diarrhea or dysentery. Add two 
tablets to each canteenful of drinking water, if sweating a 
great deal, or if having diarrhea or dysentery. 

■ 116. Scissors. — For cutting bandages, removing clothes 
from wounds, and other emergency needs. 

■ 117. Silver Protein, Mild, Tablets (4% -Grain) . — For in- 
flammation of the eye. Dissolve one tablet in a large spoon- 
full of water. Pour solution in the eye every 3 hours. 

■ 118. Sodium Bicarbonate and Peppermint Tablets. — For 
upset stomach or indigestion. Take two tablets every 30 
minutes, for not more than three doses. 



516790° — 43 8 109 



119-123 



BASIC FIELD MANUAL 



■ 119. Solution for Athlete's Foot (Frazier's Solution) . — 
For athlete's foot. Turn bottle upside down and apply a small 
amount by rubbing open end on the affected surface. Cau- 
tion : Do not use oftener than twice a day. 

■ 120. Suction Kit. — For first aid for snake or poison insect 
bites, and for wounds caused by poison arrows or other 
missiles. 

a. Apply tourniquet between body and bite. Apply above 
knee in foot and lower leg bites; above elbow in hand and 
forearm bites. Loosen tourniquet every 20 minutes for 10 
or 15 seconds. 

b. Apply iodine to area of bite and to blade for making 
Incision. # 

c. Make cross incisions inch long and Yi inch deep 
through each fang mark. 

d. Apply suction to wound, using small size cup for fingers 
and toes and larger size cup for other areas. Keep up suc- 
tion for at least three 20 -minute periods. If there is a great 
amount of bleeding from the incision, tighten tourniquet 
further, or place a gauze compress on the wound and press 
the thumb or fingers firmly over the incisions. 

e. After suction has been completed, remove tourniquet, 
sprinkle sulfanilamide into incisions, and apply a sterile 
dressing. 

■ 121: Sulfadiazine Tablets (0.5-Gram). — For prevention 
of infection in wounds. Take eight tablets by mouth, fol- 
lowed by a large amount of water. If sweating has been 
great or if large amounts of water cannot be taken both 
with the drug and for 24 hours afterwards, do not take any 
of these tablets. 

■ 122. Suxfacuanidine Tablets (0.5 -Gram) . — For bloody 
diarrhea. Take four tablets every four hours day and night, 
until bowel movements are normal. If no improvement in 
4 days, take no more tablets. 

■ 123. Sulfanilamide (5 Grams) in Sterile Individual Dou- 
ble Wrapped Envelope With Shaker Top. — For prevention of 
infection in wounds. Sprinkle contents of one shaker-top 
envelope into the wound. 



110 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



124-127 



■ 124. Sulfanilamide Tablets (0.5-Gram). — For prevention 
of infection in wounds. Take 12 tablets by mouth, followed 
by a large amount of water. If sweating has been great 
or if large amounts of water cannot be taken both with the 
drug and for 24 hours afterwards, do not take any of these 
tablets. 

■ 125. Tourniquet. — For stopping bleeding and for snake 
bite. 

■ 126. Vitamins (Multivitamin Cafsui^es or Tablets). — To 
be taken when on very limited rations. Take two capsules 
or tablets each day. 

■ 127. Water Purification (Halazone) Tablets. — For puri- 
fication of drinking water. Use according to direction on the 
container. 



ill 



INDEX 



Paragraph Page 

Abdomen, pain In 44 49 

Abdominal wounds 13b 13 

Acid, acetylsaltcylic 76-78,88 94,105 

Adhesive compress 72, 73, 75-78, 88e 90, B2, 94, 

105 

Adhesive plaster 77, 78, 111 96, 97, 109 

Aircraft casualties 63 61 

Airplane casualties 63 61 

Aloln compound tablets 76,78,82 94,97,104 

Ammonia, aromatic, inhalant 72,73,83 90,92,94, 

104 

Ammoniated mercury ointment 78,84 97,104 

Amyl nitrite " 79, 85 100, 105 

Animal bites 34 37 

Ankle, fracture of . 24 25 

Application of compress bandage 8a, lid 3,9 

Application of splints 12, 17 13, 14 

Arm, fracture of 20-22 22 

Arterial hemorrhage (bleeding) 8 3 

Artificial respiration 37 44 

Asphyxiation 36, 39, 57 41,47.59 

Aspirin 7&~78, 86 94, 105 

Atabrine 596,76,77,80,87 60,94,96, 

103, 105 

Athlete's foot 46 49 

Back, fracture of 27 27 

Bandaging 8a, 11 3 

Benzedrine 80, 89 103, 105 

Bismuth subcarbonate - 78, 90 97 

Bites: 

Animal 34 87 

Insect 30, 31 36 

Snake ga, 120 30,110 

Bleeding: 

Arterial 8 3 

Venous 8 3 

Blindness, snow 58 67 

Blisters , 48 49 

Boric acid ointment 72, 73, 75, 78, 80, 91, 98 90,92,94, 

B7, 103, 
166 

Burn injury set 72, 73, 75, 78, 92 90, 92, 94, 

97, 106 

Burn ointment 72, 73, 75, 80 90,92,94, 

103 

Burns 50, 6B, 91 50, 85, 106 

Chemical 50b, 69. 94, 97, 106, 112, 113 51,85,106, 

107, 109 

Butyn and metaphen ointment 36a (3) , 56c. 72, 73, 7B 41, 58, 90, 

92, 94 

113 



INDEX 



Paragraph Page 

Carbonmonoxlde poisoning 39, 57 47, 59 

Care of feet 46, 58 49, 60 

Chafing 47 49 

Chemical burns 50b, C9, 94, 97, 106, 112, 113 51,85, 106, 

107, 109 

Chest wounds . 13a 13 

Chills and fever.- _ 59 60 

Collarbone, fracture of ...... 23 25 

Combat injuries ..... 5 2 

Compound fracture 14, 19 13.22 

Compress, adhesive 72, 73, 75-78, 88e 90, 

92, 94, 105 

Compress bandage 8a, 11, 93 3,8,106 

Control of hemorrhage (bleeding) 8 3 

Convulsions . 42 48 

Copper sulfate solution.. 79, 94 100,106 

Cotton absorbent . 78, 95 97, 106 

Cotton pads . _ 79, 96 100, 106 

Cramps, heat . . - 51c 52 

Crotch, care of 47 49 

Definition of first aid 2 1 

Diarrhea 60 61 

Dichloramine-T in tilacetin 79, 97 100, 106 

Disinfecting water 4d, 73. 75, 76, 78, 80, 85 49, 

92, 94,97, 
103, 105 

Dislocations 28, 29 30 

Dressings . .. 8a, 11, 88, 98, 100 3,8. 

105, 106 

Drowning 1 ...... J 37 44 

Drugs . 70-127 87 

Dysentery 60 61 

Ear injuries . 36 41 

Elbow, fracture of 21 22 

Electrical shock 38 47 

Electrocution 38 47 

Equfpment for first aid 3, 70-127 1, 87 

Exhaustion, heat 51b 52 

Eye and nose drops 79, 9g 100, 106 

Eye dressing . 36. 72, 73, 75, 100 41,90, 

92. 94. 106 

Eye injuries 36.52 41,63 

Eye solution M-l 79, 101 100, 107 

Pace, wounds of 13c 13 

Fainting . . 40 48 

Feet, care of 46, 58 49, 60 

Krst aid: 

Definition of 2 1 

In combat 5 2 

Kits 70-80 87 

Packets.. 8a, o, llct, 71 3, 4, 9. 87 

Rules lor 4 1 

Shock 9 7 

Supplies and equipment 3 j 70-127 1,87 

114 



INDEX 



Paragraph Page 

Flta 42 48 

Foille 78,102 87 

Foot powder 46, 47, 77, 103 49,96,107 

Forceps 72, 104 90, 107 

Foreign bodies, removal of 36 41 

Fractures : 

Back 27 27 

Compound 14, 19 13, 22 

First aid for 16 14 

Neck 27 27 

Signs and symptoms 15 14 

Simple . z. 14 13 

Spine 27 27 

Splinting: 

Ankle 24 25 

Arm . 20, 21, 22 22,23 

Collar bone 23 25 

Elbow 21 ' 22 

Hip.„ 25 25 

Jaw.— . 26 27 

Knee.- 24 25 

Leg.., 24 25 

Thigh 25 25 

Transportation of 24-27, 65-67 25, 65 

With wounds 19 22 

Freezing 54 53 

Frost bite 54 63 

Gangrene Bo 4 

Gases: 

Peacetime, poisonous 39, 57 47, 59 

War 6a, 69 85 

Gunshot wounds.^ 7 3 

Halazone „ 45, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 105 49,92, 

94, 96,97, 
103. 107 

Head injuries 13c, 43 13,48 

Health measures: 

General 4,29-48 1,30 

In the Arctic 63-58 63 

In the desert 49-62 60 

In the Jungle and Tropics 69-62 60 

In Chemical Warfare 69(t, e, f 86,87 

Heat cramps 51o 63 

Heat exhaustion 61b 52 

Heatstroke 6ltt 62 

Hemorrhage: 

Arterial 8 ■ 3 

Control of 8 3 

Venous— 8 3 

Hip, fracture of 25 25 

Hydrogen peroxide solution 79, 106 100,107 

Immersion foot "8 60 

Indigestion 76, 78, 118 94, 97, 109 

11S 



INDEX 



Paragraph Page 

Infection II 8 

Injured : 

Removal from tanks and aircraii 63,64 61,64 

Transportation of 65-67 65 

Injuries: 

In aircraft 63 61 

In combat 5 2 

In tanks 64 64 

To head 13, 43 13,48 

Insect bites and stings 30, 31 36 

Insect repellent 30, 76, 77, 107 36, 

94, 96, 107 

Insecticide powder 31 36 

Iodine applicator . . 77, 108 96, 107 

Iodine swabs 29, 72, 73, 75, 76, 78, 80, 108 30, 90, 

92, 94, 97, 
103, 107 

Jaw, fracture of 26 27 

Jaw, wounds of 13 13 

Kits, first aid: 

Aeronautic . _ .. . . 75 

Arctic _ 78 

Frying pan 80 

Gas casualty . 79 

Individual 71 

Jungle kit (individual) 77 

Jungle kit (large) 78 

Motor vehicle (12 unit) 72 

Motor vehicle (24: unit) 73 

Packet, first aid 71 

Parachute 74 

Snake-bite 29, 129 

Suction 29, 120 

Knee, fracture of- 24 

Leeches 33 37 

Leg, fracture ol . 24 25 

Lewisite 69E>(2) 85 

Litters, transportation with 67 81 

Lung irritants 69 85 

Malaria 59 60 

Mercuric ointment, ammoniated... 78,84 97,104 

Methods of removing casualties: 

From airplanes 63c * 63 

From tanks .. 04 64 

With litters 67 81 

Without litters . . -- - 66 65 

Method of water purification .. 45 49 

Morphine tartrate 10, 63c(2), 64, 74-76, 78, 110 8,63,64, 

94, 97, 107 

Mouth, wounds of 13c 13 

Mustard gas 69b (2) 85 

Neck, fracture of 27 27 

Nosebleed 4Sc 60 



116 



INDEX 



Paragraph Page 

Ointments 72, 73, 75, 78, 84, 91, 100, 102, 113 90, 

82,94,97, 
104, 106, 
107, 109 

Oxygen , 63a 62 

Packet, nrst-aid a, lid, 71 3,9,87 

Pain: 

Control of 10 8 

In abdomen 44 49 

Pins, safety 11, 18, 72, 73 8, 

15, 90,92 

Plaster, adhesive 77, 78 96, 97 

Poison ivy and oak 35 38 

Poisoned wounds 29, 48a 30, 49 

Poisonous gases 39, 67, 68, 69 47, 69,85 

Poisonous plants and fruits • 35, 48t> 38, 49 

Poisonous snakes 29 30 

Poisons 48 49 

Pontocalne compound ointment 79, 112 100, 109 

Pressure bandage 8a 3 

Protective ointment M-i 68, 69a, b, 71c, 113 85,80,109 

Purification of water 45, 73, 75, 76, 78, 80, 105 49, 

92, 94, 97, 
103,107 

Rations, limited 126 111 

Kemoval of casualties: 

Prom airplanes 63c 63 

Prom tnnks 64 64 

With litters „ — _ 67 81 

Without litters . . . 66 65 

Removal of foreign bodies - 36 41 

Respiration, artificial - 37 44 

Rules for first aid ...... 4 1 

Safetypins 11, 18, 72, 73 8, 

15,90,92 

Salt -_ ... - 50, 61 50,61 

Salt tablets 50a, 51a, 6(2), 61, 76-76, B0, 115 50, 

52,61,84, 
103, 109 

Scissors 72,73,75,116 90,92, 

84, 108 

Shelter foot 58 60 

Shock: 

Electrical 38 47 

Prevention and first aid 9 7 

Signs and symptoms ' ' 

Signs and symptoms: 

Of fractures...- " *jj 

Of shock , no » ? 

Silver protein, mild 78 . s1 ' 10 ? 

Slings 18 . 15 

Snakebite 29.120 M.U0 

Snake-bite kit 29, 120 30, 110 

S.iow blindness 66 67 

Sodium bicarbonate and peppermint tablets— 76,78,118 94,97,109 

117 



INDEX 



Paragraph Page 

Solution for athlete's foot 77, llg 96, 110 

Splinting 12, 20-27 13, 22 

Splints 12, 17 13, 14 

Sprains 28 30 

Sterilization of water... 45, 73 , 75, 76, 78, 80, 105 49, 

92, 94, 97, 
103, 107 

Stings.^ 30*32 36 

Strains 28 30 

Suction kit... 29, 120 30, 110 

Sulfadiazine burn ointment 72, 73, 75 90,92,94 

Sulfonamide drugs 11, 8, 

19,29,50 , 54e, 60,01,71-73,75-78, 80, 121-124 22, 

30, 50, 66, 
61,87,94, 
103, 110 

Sunburn 50 SO 

Sunstroke . 51a 52 

Supplies, first aid 3, 70-127 1,87 

Swelling 15,17,21,28 14,22,30 

Syrettes, morphine 10,110 8,107 

Tank casualties 64 84 

Tear gas 69<i 86 

Thigh, fracture c*__ 25 25 

Throat, wounds of 9 7 

Tourniquet 8c, 55, 72-75, 125 4, 

57. 90, 111 

Transportation of casualties: 

With back injuries 27 27 

With face, jaw, and mouth injuries 13 13 

With litters 67 81 

With neck injuries 27 27 

Without litters C6 65 

With spine injuries 27 27 

Trench foot . 6B 60 

Triangular bandage.. 72,73,88 90,92,105 

Unconsciousness 41 us 

Venous hemorrhage (bleeding) 8 3 

Vesicant agents- . . 69& 85 

Vitamins 125 111 

War gases 68,69 85 

Water purification 45, 73,75,76, 78,80,105 49, 

92,94,97, 
103, 107 

Water purification tablets 45,73,75,76,78,80,105 49, 

92, 94,97, 
103, 107 

Water requirements 51,61 51,61 

Wiridburn ' 52 63 

Wounded: 

Methods of removing from tanks and air- 
planes 6'le. 64 63, 64 

Method of transporting 65-67 65 

Wound dressings ej, g a 105, 106 

113 



INDEX 



Wounds: 


Paragraph 


Page 


Abdomen 


_ 13 


13 


Chest . . 


.._ 13 


13 


Exposure of 


7 


2 


Face _ . 


13 


13 




7 


2 


Head 


13,43 


13,48 


In cold climate's 


55 


57 


Infected-. 


_ _ 11 


8 


Jaw 


13 


13 


Mouth _ . . 


__. 13 


13 


Poisoned ~- -- - - 


. 29,48 


30.40 


Throat : ... 


9 


7 


With fractures _ 


. 19 


22 



o 



119 



