FM 21-11 



FIELD MANUAL 



FIRST AID 

FOR 
SOLDIERS 



HEADQUARTERS, DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 



JUNE 1976 



Field Manual 



No. 21-11 



*FM 21-n 

HEADQUARTERS 
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY 
WAaniNGTON, D.C., SO June 1976 



FIRST AID FOR SOLDIERS 



PART ONE 

CliAITEK 1 

2 
PART TWO 

-Chaiter 3 



Section I, 
II 

III 

CHAiTEK 4 

Section i 
II 



111 

Chaiter 5, 



Section I. 
II. 

in. 

IV. 

PART THREE 

CilAI'l'KR 7. 

Section I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

CllAlTEK H. 

Section 1. 



INTRODUCTION 

GENERAL 1-1—1-5 

VITAL BODY FUNCTIONS ^-1, 2-2 

BASIC LIFESAVING FUtST AID 

MEASURES 
OPEN THE AIRWAY AND 

RESTORE BREATHING AND 

HEARTBEAT (MEASURE A) 
Open the Airwuy— Immediately _ . 3-1, 3-2 
Artificial Resi>i ration — If Needed 

Administer Iinmediutely 3-11 -3-7 

Cloned-Cliest lleurt Massatje — If 

needed Administer Immediately 3-8 — 3-14 
STOP THE BLEEDING 

(MEASURE B) 

General A-\, 4-2 

Application of Pi'essure Dressintj, 

Elevation of Limb, and Digital 

Pressure 4-3—1-8 

Application of Tourniquet 4-9—1-14 

PREVENT SHOCK (MEASURE C) 5-1— 5-a 
DRESS AND BANDAGE THE 

WOUND TO AVOID INFECTION 

(MEASURE D) 

General 6_i__&_;^ 

Diessings G-4, &-5 

Basic Types of Bandaj^es (>-0— 6-8 

Bandagmi;: of Various Body Paits (j-9 — 6-18 

SPECIAL FIRST AID MEASURES 
FIRST AID FOR SEVERE 

WOUNDS AND BURNS 

Introduction 7-1, 7-2 

Head Injuries 7-3 — 7_5 

Face and Nl^cU Wounds 7_ti, 7-7 

Suckinjf Wounds of the Chest 7-8, 7-D 

Abdominal Wounds 7-10, 7-U 

Severe Biirms _ . _ _ 7-12, 7-i:i 

IMM0BILIZ.\T10N OF 
FRACTURES 

Introduction S-1— iMi 

Immobilization MetliotIs S-7 — ^11 



3—7 
8—10 



11—14 



14—20 



21—28 



2^ 



29—31 
31—35 
36—39 



40 

41—43 
43 
44—55 



56 

56—57 

57 

5K— 60 

60 

61 — 63 



64—67 
67—83 



Thik manual iupereedes FM 21-11, 28 May 1970. 



1 



CHAiTRK a FiiLsr AIT) roR common 

1(1. TUANSI'OinrNC THK WOUNUKH 
SOIJXKR 

Spc'tioii 1. Iiilrnrhictiori 10-1, 10-2 

II. MemiiiiiI Cniiiis lO_;t_l((-« 
(^IIAI'IKU n. KIKSrAlt) IN A'IOXK: 

KNVlRONMKN'r 

S*'<'ti*)n I. Iiili-tMiiirlior) __ _ 11-1, l\-2 

1 1. (llu'inical-JiiolDfr'*''^! Apents 1 \-H — 11-5 

rir. Nei-vt- Aprt'iits H-fi— U-R 

IV. OIIhm Apcrits 11-9— U-K; 

(^ilAi-iKIt 12. I'SYCnOLOClCAL I- HIST AID 



Rectioii 1. CJciipifil 12-1— 12-i 



r. 



t 



II. Principles of ['KyclioloRical First Aid 12-6—12-10 

III. C'i)Ti]n)nn Typ<?s of Ilenction to 

Disfisler 12-11 — 12-1 :t 

IV. PsychoioRical Pirst Aid 12-14—12-17 

Ari'ENDiX A. RSFKUKNCKS 

B. CONTENTS OF FIRST AID CASE 

AND KITS _ 

INDEX 





12: 


121- 


125 


125- 


-127 


127- 


nn 


IM- 


-i:ii> 


M»- 


141 


142- 


-144 


144 


I4n 


HG- 


-149 


150 




151- 


-152 


153- 


~15R 



PART ONE 
INTRODUCTION 



CHAPTER 1 
GENERAL 



1-1. Purpose and Scope 

a. Tlie purpose of this manual is to describe firat aid measures, 

to explain how and when to apply them, and to emphasize thj 
significance of prompt, effective first aid. The measures describe*' 
can be applied as self-help as well as help to otliers. Since firat aid 
is the emergency care given to the sick, injured, or wounded before 
medical treatment can be administered by medical personnel, this 
manual is directed to nonmedical personnel. Even though the 
manual uses the terms "soldier" and "he/his," the procedures 
discussed apply to all types of casualties/victims; and the measures 
described are for use by male and female soldiers alike. 

b. Part One is an introductory discussion of first aid. Part Two 
explains the four basic hfesaving first aid measures: A — OPEN 
THE AIRWAY AND RESTORE BREATHING AND HEART- 
BEAT, B— STOP THE BLEEDING, C-PREVENT SHOCK, and 
D— DRESS AND BANDAGE THE WOUND TO AVOID INFEC- 
TION. Part Three describes special fust aid measures and modifi- 
cations of the basic lifesaving measures. 

c. The material in this manual is applicable to both nuclear and 
nonnuclear warfare. 

1-2. Standardization Agreements 

Provisions of this publication ai*e the subject of the following 
international agreements: 



NA TO 


CKNTO 


SKATO 


STANAfJa 


STANA<^'n 


ST A NAG n 


2122 


2122 


2122 


212R 


2120 





TitJr 

Medii-nl TrninitiK in First Aid, Basic 

llypipnf tiin\ Kiiiprpciu'v Cnre 

Medicnl First Aid Equipment niid Supplies 
First Aid and Hygiene Training in NBC 

Operations 2358 23BR 

When atnendment, revision, or cancellation of this puhlication is 
pro|>osed and such action would affect or violate the international 
npfreements concerned, the preparing: activity will take appropri- 
ate reconciliation action through international standardization 
channels. 

1—3. Users' Comments or Queries 

Users of this manual are encouraged to recommend changes for 
its improvement. Comments should he recorded on DA Form 2028 
{Recommended Changes to Publications and Blank Forms) and 
keyed to the specific page, paragraph, and line of the text in which 
change is recommended. Reasons must be provided for each 
change to insure understanding and complete evaluation. The 
recommended changes are to be forwarded directly to the Superin- 
tendent, Academy of flealth Sciences, US Army, ATTN: HSA~ 
CDL, Fort Sam Houston, Texas 78234. 

1-4. Importance of First Aid and First Aid Items 

a. The Army Medical Department has the finest equipment 

avaiiahle and personnel who have been trained in the most 
mo<lern methods of saving Ufe and easing pain. Medical personnel, 

however, cannot be everywhere at once. 

h. The soldier may have to depend upon his first aid knowledge 
and skin to save his own life or the life of another soldier. He may 
be able to save lives, prevent permanent disabilities, and reduce 
long periods of hospitalization by knowing what to do and not to do 
and seeking medical assistance as soon as possible. 

c. Anything the soldier can do to keep himself and others in 
fighting condition is part of his primary mission, that of fighting. 
Most wounded soldiers are able to return to their units to fight 
again primarily because they are given appropriate and timely 
first aid followed by excellent medical care. 

d. Every soldier is issued a field first aid case which he carries 
with him at all times for his personal use (fig 1-1). It contains one 
or two combat dressings with attached bandages for use on a 



© 



CASE 





© 



WRAPPED DRESSING IN 
PLASTIC ENVELOPE 



© 




COVER FOR ENVELOPES 





ENVELOPES OF MIXTURE 
FOR BURN CASES 



Figure 1-1. Field/tret aid case (individual) and contents. 



wound and two envelopes of sotlium chloride-sodium hicarhonate 
Ttiixture for conKutnj)tion in the event of a burn. When the soldier 
administers first aid to another person, he must remember to use 
the wounded person's first aid items first; he may need his own 
later. The soldier must check his first aid case regularly and 
rei»lenish any items u^ed from it. The items may be obtained from 
unit sujjply. (A general purpose first aid kit is carried in all 
vehicles (app B). 



1-5. Bask Guides for Administering First Aid 

After tJie sol<lier learns thoroup:hly how to administer each of the 
lifesavins and other first aid measures discussed in this manual, 
the time will come when be must apply his knowledp:e instantly. A 
special awareness of the basic iXVs and DO NOT's in administer- 
ing first aid will help to p:uide him in making quick and correct 
decisions. To act inconectly can be just as serious or fatal to a 
wounded soldier as tlie failure to administer a lifesaving measure. 

a. The DO's. 

(DAci promptly but calmly. (A person who "loses his head" is 
of little or no value to a wounded soldier.) 

(2) Reassure the wounded soldier and at the same time quickly 
and gently eoramive him to determine the need for administeriup 
lifesavinp: measures A— OPEN THE AIRWAY AND RESTORE 
BREATHING AND HEARTBEAT and B— STOP THE BLEED- 
ING. If required, administer these measures instantly. (Lack of 
oxypren intake leads to death in a very few minutes. Human life 
cannot contintie without an adequate volume of bloo(! to carry 
oxy^er to the tissues.) 

(3) Reexamine the wounded soldier immediately in a careful, 
preutle, orpranized (hend-to-toe, front and back) manner to deter- 
mine the extent and type of injuries; then, as required, administer 
promptly lifesavinpr measures C— PREVENT SHOCK and D— 
DRESS AND BANDAGE THE WOUND TO AVOID INFECTION. 
(H shock is not prevented or corrected, the soldier may die even 
thougrh the injury causing the shock would not otherwise be fatal. 
Healing of a wound and recovery of the soldier depend to a ^eat 

extent upon how well the wound was protected from contamina- 
tion initially.) 

6. The DO NOTs. 

(1) Do not position a soldier on his back if he is unconscious or 
has a face or neck wound (i)ara 5-76 and 7-76). 



(2) Do not remove clothing from nn inj\ired soUHer by pulling 
or tearing it off (para 4-5, 7-I8«(l), and 8-1). 

(H) Do not touch or try to clean a dirty woun(i, inchiding burns 
(para (>~1 and 7-13a(l)). 

(4) Do not remove dressings and i>andages once they have 
been [)laced over a wound (para 4~(>fc). 

(5) Do not loosen a tourniquet once it has been applied (imra 4- 
14). 

(*i) Do not move a soldier who has a fracture until it has been 
properly splinted (para 4-7, 5-7a, and 8-4) unless it is absohitely 
necessary, such as moving him from close enemy action, a toxic 
(carbon monoxide) environment, or a burning building. 

(7) Do not give fluids by mouth to a soldier who is unconscious, 
nauseated, or vomiting or who has an abtionunal or neck woun(i 
(para 7-116, 7-136, and 9-1 Sa). 

(H) Do not permit the head of a soldier with a head injury to be 
lower than his ho<ly (para 7-56). 

(9) Do not try to push protruding intestines or brain tissue 
back into a wound (para 7-5a and 7-na). 

(10) Do not put any medication on a burn (para 7-K^a(l)). 

(11) Do not administer first aid measures which are unneces- 
sary or beyond your capabilities. 

(lii) Do not fail to replenish your first aid case with items 
which you have used from it. 



CHAPTER 2 
VITAL BODY FUNCTIONS 



2-1. Respiration and Blood Circulation 

Respiration (inhalation and exhaJation) and blood circulation are 
vital body functions. Interruption of either of these two functions 
need not be fatal IF timely and appropriate first aid measures are 
correctly applied. 

a. Respiration. Respiration is the means through which oxygen 

is taken into the body and carbon dioxide is expelled from the 
body. 

(1) Respiration is accomplished by means of the airway (nose, 
mouth, throat, voicebox, windpipe, and bronchial tree), a canal 
through which air passes to and from the lun^; the hmgs (two 
elastic orprans made up of thousands of tiny air Rpncen and covere(J 
by airtight membrane); and the chest cage (formed by the muscle- 
connected ribs which join the spine in the back and the breastbone 
in the front). The top part of the chest cage is closed by the 
structure of the neck, and the bottom part is separated from the 
abdommal cavity by a large dome-shaped muscle called the dia- 
phragm (fig 2-1). 

(2) The diaphragm and the rib muscles, which are under the 
control of the respiratory center in the brain, automatically con- 
tract and relax. Contraction causes an increase, and relaxation a 
dorron^e. in the si^.o of Iho chost cage. When the chest cage 

increases and then decreases, the air pressure in the lungs is Hrst 
ess and then more than the atmospheric pressure, thus causing 
Uje air o rush ,n and out of the lungs to equalize the pressure 
1 his cycle of mhalmg and exlialing is repeated about 12 to 18 times 
per minute. 

b. Blood Circnlation, Blood is circulated through the body 
tissues by means of the heart and the blood vessels (arteries, veins! 
and capillaries). The heart is divided into two separate halves, each 

8 



NOSE 



MOUTH ■ 



(TONGUE) 



THROAT 



RIBS 



MUSCLES 



WJNOPIPE 




BRONCHIAL 
TREE 



DIAPHRAGM 



Figure 2-1. Airway, lungs, aiid cheat cage. 

j.jtinir as a pump. The left side pumps oxytjenatetl hload (blight red) 
through the arteries into the capillaries; nutrients and oxygen pass 
from the blood through the walls of the capillaries into the cells. At 
the same time waste products and carbon dioxide enter the capil- 
laries. From the capillaries the deoxygenated blood is carried 
through the veins to the right side of the heart and then into the 
lungs where carbon dioxide is expelled and oxygen is picked up. 
Blood in the veins is dark red because of its low oxygen content. 
Blood does not flow through the veins in spurts as it does through 
the arteries ((2) below). 

(1) Heartbeat. The heart functions as a pump to circulate the 
bloo<l continuously through tite blood vessels to ail parts of the 
body. It contracts, forcing the blood from its chambers; tlien it 



relaxes, perniittiiiji: its charnbrrs to lerill with blood. Tliis cyt'lo of 
contraction and relaxation, whicli is repeated continuously at a 
regular rhythmical rate, is called the heartbeat. 

{2) Pulse. The systemic arteries carry riclxly oxygenated blood 
from the left si(ie of the heart into all parts of the body. Bloo<i 
flows thronp:h the aiteries in spurts. The arteries expand each 
time the heart forces blood into them and contract as the blood 
moves farther alon^ the circulatory system. This cycle o^ expan- 
siot} and contraction of the arteries is called the pulse. The noiiiial 
averap:e rate of the pulse is considered to be 60 to 80 beats per 
minute. 

2-2. Conditions Which Adversely Affect the Vital Body 
Functions 

a. Lack ofOxygeyx. Tluman life cannot exist without a continuous 
intake of oxyp^en. Lack of oxyp^en rapidly leads to death. F'irst aid, 
therefore, involves knowing: how to OPEN THE AIRWAY AND 
RESTORE BREATHING AND HEARTBEAT (chap 3). 

h. Bleeding. Human life cannot continue without an adequate 
volume of blood to carry oxygen to the tissues. An important first 
aid measure, then, is to STOP THE BLEEDING to prevent 
unnecessary loss of blood (chap 4). 

c. Shock. Shock is a condition in which there is inadequate blood 
flow to the vita! tissuos and orp:ans. Shock which remains uncor- 
rected may result in death even thoirjjfh the injury or condition 
causinp: the shock would not otliei-wise be fatal. Shock can resirit 

from nrany causes, such as loss of blood, loss of fluid from deep 
burns, expansion of the blood vessels, pain, and reaction to the 
si^bt of a wound or bloot!. First aid includes knowledge of how to 
PREVENT SHOCK, since the soldier's chances of survival are 
much greater if he does not develop shock (chap 5). 

d. Infection. Recovery from a severe injury or healing of a 
wound depends to a great extent upon how well the wound was 
protected from contamination initially. Infection results from the 
multiplication and giowth of germs which invade a wound or a 
break in the skin by contamirmtion. Since germs are in the air and 
on the skin and clothing, some of them will get into every wound 
immediately. The objective is to keep additional germs out of the 
wound- A knowledge of first aid includes how to DRESS THE 
WOUND TO AVOID INFECTION (chap 6). 



10 



PART TWO 
BASIC LIFESAVJNG F?RST AID MEASURES 



CHAPTER 3 

OPEN THE AIRWAY AND RESTORE BREATHING AND 

HEARTBEAT (MEASURE A) 



Section I. OPEN THE AIRWAY— IMMEDIATELY 

3—1 . General 

In order for air to flow to an<l from the \>n\^, thti uppor aii-wiiy 
must he iinobstrutited. 

3-2. Adjusting Position to Enlarge Airway Passage 

a, Head-Tilt Method Immediately place the soldier on his hack 
with his neck extended and his head in a chin-up position (fi^ 3-1), 
If a rolled hianket, poncho, or similar object is available, place it 
under his shoul<lers to help maintain this t>osition, but do not 
waste time obtaining such materials. SECONDS COUNT! The 
Itead-tilt method is effective in many cases. 

b. Jaw-Lift Method. If the hea<l-tilt method is unsuccessful, 

atijust the jaw to a juttiiii? out position (fij^ :i-2). This i)ositionin^- 

moves the base of the tongue farther away from the back of the 

throat, thus enlarg-ing the aii-way passa^^^e to the lunyrs. It may he 

accomt)lishe<i by either the tluunb jawdife inetho<l or the two-hand 
Jaw-!ift ntethod. 

(1) Thumb jaw-liji. Tliis is ordinarily the metho(i of choice for 
adjusting- the jaw unless the nature of the injury prevents its use. 
IMat:u your thumb in the solcher's mouth, grasp tlie U>wer jaw 
firndy, and lift it forward (a, fig ;i-2). Do not attempt to liold or 
depiess the tongue. 

II 



AIRWAY 
CLOSED 

BY TONGUE 





AIRWAY OPENED 
BY EXTENDING 
NECK 





Figure S-1. Neck extended and head in chin-up position. 



12 



AiRWAY OPENED 
FARTHER BY 
ADJUSTING JAW 





THUMB JAW-LJFT 





TWO-HAND JAW-LIFT 



Figure 3-2. Methods for adjusting lower jaw to jutting out position. 



13 



(2) Two-havd jaw-lij}.. If the soldiers jaws are so tightly closed 
UiM Mu' thninl) rainiot. he inserted inU) the mouth, tlie two lmii() 
JMw-Iia is use<l. Usiiijr both iiaiuls, p:iasp the angles of the lower 
jaw just below the ear lobes. Lift Ihe jaw forcibly forward; tlieii 
open the iips by pushing the lower lip toward the chin with the 
tluimbs(b, fig 3-2). 



Section M. ARTPFICIAI RESPIRATION— IF NEEDED, ADMINISTER 

IMMEDIATELY 



3—3, General 

a. If the injured soldier does not promptly resume adequate 
srx>ntaneous breathinp: after the airway is open, artificial respira- 
tion must be started. Be calm! Think and act quickly! The sooner 
you beprin artificial respiration, the more likely you are to succeed 
in restoring his breathing. If you are in doubt as to whether or not 
he is breathing, do not waste valuable seconds; give him artificial 
respiration, since it can do no harm to a person who is breathing. 
Tf the soldier i<=i breathing, you can ordinarily feel and see his chest 
moving or feel and hear air being expelled by putting your hand or 
ear close to his mouth and nose. 

b. If the soldier has no heartbeat, you must also give him closed- 
chest heart massage immediately (sec 111), If two persons are 
available, one can give artificial respiration while the other gives 
closed-chest heart massage. If you are the only person available, 
you must i)erforni both measures, alternating them as described in 
paragraph 3-13. 

c. There are two primary methods of administering artificial 
reRpiration: the moutli-to-mouth and the chest-pressure arm-lia. 
The mouth-to-mouth method is the preferred one; however, it 
cannot be used if the soldier has a crushed face or is in a toxic 
environment. If he has a crushed face, the chest pressure arm-Jia 
method must be used. In a chemically contaminated atmosphere, 
the back-pressure arm-lift method may be used as a substitute for 
the mask-to-mouth method. 



3^. Mouth-to-Mouth Resuscitation Method 

In this method of artificial respiration, you inflate the soldier's 
hings with air from your lungs. This can be accomplished by 
blowing air into his mouth. The mouth-to-mouth resuscitation 
method is peifornied as follows: 

14 



a. With the wounded soldier lyin^ on his hack, position yourself 
at the side of his head. Place one hand beliind the net-k to 
maintain the head in a face-up position with the head tilted back 
as far as possible. 

h. Pinch the nostrils together with the thumb and index fmger of 
your other hand and let this same hand exert pressure on the 
forehead to maintain the backward head tilt (% 3-3). (The nose 
can also be sealed by pressing? your cheek firmly against it.) 

c. Take a deep breath and place your mouth (in an airtight seal) 
aroimd the soldier's mouth. (If the injured person is an infant or 
small child, cover both his nose and mouth with your mouth, 
sealing your lips against the skin of his face.) 

d. Blow into the mouth forcefully to cause the soldier's chest to 
rise. (In infants and small children you should need to blow only 
small puffs of air from your cheeks rather than deep breaths from 
your lungs.) If the chest rises, this indicates that sufficient air is 
getting into the soldier's lungs. Then proceed as in e and/ below. 

(1) If the chest does not rise, take corrective action immedi- 
ately by adjusting the jaw (para 3-26) and blowing harder making 
sure that air is not leaking from around your mouth or out of the 
soldier's pinched nose. 

(2) If the chest still does not rise, move the soldier's head to 
one side and clear his airway with your fingers. To do this, open 
his mouth and run your fingers down the inside of the lower 
cheeks, over the base of the tongue, and into the throat. Move 
your fingers across the back of the thioat wiih a sweeping motion 
to remove any vomitus, mucus, or foreign bodies. 

(3) if the airway is still not clear, roll the soldier onto his side; 
then using the heel of your hand, deliver sharp blows between the 
soldier's shoulder blades to dislo<lge the foreign body from the 
airway. Immediately inflate his lungs, using mouth-to-mouth re- 
suscitation. 

e. When the soldier's chest rises, remove yoiu" mouth from the 
soldier's mouth and listen for the return of air from hiti huigs 
(exhalation). If his exhalation is noisy, elevate his jaw more. 

/. After each exhalation of air from the sobher's lungs, pinch his 
nose again ami blow another deep breath into his aii-way. Ade- 
quate ventilation should he insureti on every breath by seeing Uie 
soldiei's chest rise and fall and by hearing and feeling the air 
escajH! during exhalation. The fiisl four breaths should be full 

15 



quick breaths (excejit in infants and small children), without 
allowing: time for full lunp deflation between breaths. Thereafter, 
repeat the moutli-to-mouth resuscitation procedure at the rate of 
approximately once every 5 seconds. Continue mouth-to-mouth 

resuscitation until the soldier regains consciousness, until you are 
reliovofl by a medically traino<l person, or for at least 45 minutes in 
the absence of ali life sipfiis- As the soldier starts to breathe, adjust 
the tiniinp: of your efforts to assist him. A smooth rhythm is 
desir<Ml but split second timing is not essential. 

(1) After a period of resuscitation, the soldier's abdomen may 
hulfic This indicates that some of the air is Ko'iufr into his stonnxcb. 
Since inllation of the stomach makes it more difilcult to inflate the 
lungs, apply p^entle pressure to the abdomen with your hand at 
frequent intervals between inflations. 

(2) If your breathinjr has been very deep and rapid for too lonp: 
a period, you may become faint, tingle, or even lose consciousness 
if you persist. However, if you administer only four full quick 
breaths then adjust your breathing to the rate of approximately 
once every 5 seconds with only moderate increase in normal 
volume, you will be able to continue to give artificial respiration 
for a long period without experiencing temporary ill effects. (If you 



OBSERVE RISE AND 
?FALL OF SOLDIER'S 
^ CHEST 




Figure J-f, Mouth'to-mouth artificial reHpiration. 



16 



become distressed from giving shallow breaths to an infant or a 
small child, interrupt your rhythm occasionally to take a deep 
breath.) 



3-5, Mouth-to-Nose Method 

This method should be used if you cannot perform mouth-to- 
mouth breathing because the soldier has a sevei'e jaw fracture or 
mouth wound or his jaws are tightly closed by spasms. The mouth- 
to-nose method is performed in the same way as the mouth-to- 
mouth method except that you blow into the nose while you pinch 
the lips closed with one hand. It may be necessary to separate the 
soldier's lips to allow the air to escai)e during exhalation. 

3—6. Chest-Pressure Arm-Lift Method 

This method is to be used when the mouth-to-mouth method 
cannot be used because the soldier has a crushed face, 

a. Preliminary Steps, 

(1) Clear the soldier's airway (para 3-4ti(2)), 

(2) Position him on his back, 

(li) Position the soldier's head with his face up and place a 
rolled blanket or some other similar object under his shoulders so 

that his head will drop back in a chin-up position. 

(4) Stand at his head and face his feet. Kneel on one knee and 
place your other foot at the other side of his head and against his 
shoulder to steady it (a, fig 3-4). If you become uncomfoitable after 
a period of time, quickly switch to the other knee. 

b. Procedure, 

(1) Grasping the soldiei'*s hands and holding them over his 
lower ribs, rock forward and exert steady, uniform pressure almost 
directly downward (b, fig 3-4) until you meet firm resistance. This 
pressure forces air out of the lungs. 

(2) Lift his arms vertically upward (c, fig 3—4). Stretch them 
backward as far as possible (d, fig 3-4). This process of lifting and 
stretching the arms increases the size of the chest and draws air 
into the lungs. 

(3) Replace his hands on his chest and repeat the cycle: 
PRESS, LIFT, STRETCH, REPLACE. Give 10 to 12 cycles per 
minute at a steady uniform rate. Give counts of equal length to 
the first three steps. The foiath or REPLACE step should be 
performed as quickly as possible. 

17 



(4) As he attempts to breathe, adjust the timing of your efforts 
to assist him. Continue artificial respiration until the soldier 
rep^ains consciousness, until you are relieved by a medically 
trained person, or for at least 45 minutes in the absence of all life 
si^is. 

c. Releasing Posiiioyi to Replacement. When you become tired, 
release your position to another person, if available, with no break 
in ihythni. Continuing: to administer artificial respiration, move to 
one side vt'hiie the replacement takes his position from the other 
side. During the STRETCH step, the replacement grasps the 
soldier's wrists and continues artificial respiration in the same 
rhythm, shifting his grip to the soldier's hands during the RE- 
PLACE step. 



3-7. Back-Pressure Arm-Lifr Method 

This is an alternate method used in a chemically contaminated 
atmosphere as a substitute for the mask-to-mouth method. It is 
the third best choice of artificial respiration. 

a. If the soldier is wearing a protective mask, lift the mask, 
quickly clear the upper airway and the mask with your fingers, 
and replace the mask. Maintain a clear airway by repeating this 

procedure later, if necessary. If the soldier should be masked but is 
not, put his mask on him. 

h. Place the soldier on his stomach with face to one side, neck 
extended, and hands under the head. Kneel at the soldier's head 
aTid place your hands on his back so that the heels of your hands 
lie just below a line between the armpits with thumbs touching 
aTid fingers extended downward and outward (a, fig 3-5). 

(1) Rock forward, keeping your arms straight, and exert 
pressure almost directly downward on the soldier's back, forcing 
air out of his lungs (b, fig 3-5). 

{2) Then rock backwnr<l, releasing the pressure, and grasp his 
arms just above the elbows (c, fig 3-5). 

(3) Continue to rock backward, pulling the arms upward and 

inward (toward the head) until resistance and tension in his 

shoulders are noted. This expands the chest, causing air to enter 
the kings (d, fig 3-5). 

(4) Rock forward and release the soldier's arms. This causes 
passive expiration. 

(5) Rei)eat the cycle of PRESS, RELEASE, LlFf, and RE- 
LEASE for 10 to 12 times per minute. 

16 




(T) HANDS ON LOWER RIBS 




(T) STEADY PRESSURE DOWNWARD 




© 



ARMS nPTED UPWARD 




® 



ARMS BACKWARD AS f AR AS POSSIBLE 



Figure S-i. Cheat-preaaure arm-lift method of artificial re6j.itrativ>i. 



19 



© 



® 




HANDS ON BACK Of INJURED SOLDIER 
WITH HEELS OF HANDS JUST BELOW 
A LINE BETWEEN THE ARMPITS, THUMBS 
TOUCHING, AND FINGERS EXTENDED 

DOWNWARD AND OUTWARD 



ROCKING FORWARD WITH ARMS 
STRAIGHT, PRESSING ALMOST 

DIRECTLY DOWNWARD 









ROCKING BACKWARD, RELEASING THE 
PRESSURE, AND GRASPING THE ARMS JUST 
ABOVE THE ELBOWS 







CONTINUING TO ROCK BACKWARD, PULLING 
THE ARMS UPWARD AND INWARD 

[TOWARD THE HEAD) 




Figure S-5. [iack-pre8iture arm-lift method of artificial resjnration 



20 



Section m. CLOSED-CHEST HEART MASSAGE— IF NEEDED 

ADMJNISTER IMMEDIATELY 

3—8. General 

If a soldier's heart stops beating, you must give him closed-cliest 
heart massage as welt as artificial resi)iration immediately. SEC- 
ONDS COUNT! Stoppage of the heart is soon followed by cessation 
of respiration unless cessation of respiration has occurred first Be 
calm! Think and act! When a soldier's heart has stopped, he has no 
pulse at all (para 2-16(2)); he is unconscious and limp, and the 
pupils of his eyes are open wide. To determine the presence or 
absence of a soldier's pulse, place the tips of your fingers on his 
neck at the side of his windpipe as illustrated in figure 3-6. If you 
do not detect a pulse immediately, do not waste time checking 
further; start heart massage and artificial respiration at once! 
Furthermore, if you find the soldier's pulse to be very weak and 
irregular, you must give him closed-chest heart massage and 
artificial respiration, since these signs indicate ineffective beats of 
the heart and precede heart stoppage. 



PULSE 




Figure 3-€. Flacemeni offingern to dnUci pulve. 



J-y. General Principles of Closed-Chest Heart Massage 

a Closed-chest heart massage is the rhythmical compression of 
the heart without surgically opening the chest. It is designed to 
provide artificial circulation in order to keep blood flowing to the 



31 



brain and other orKaiis until the heart begins to heat normally 
a^ain. It is not the same as oi>en-chest heart massage, in which 
the chest wall is cvit open and the heart itself is compressed 
directly by hand, 

fc. The heart is located between the breastbone and the spine (fig 
;i~7). Pressure on the breastbone pushes the heart against the 
spine, thus forcing the blood out of the heart into the arteries. 
Release of pressure allows the lieart to refill with blood. 



BREASTBONE 



RIBS 



HEART 




RIBS 



SPINE 



Fiifitrr ,T 7. ('Iteftt rage and hrarL 



3-10. Preliminary Steps for Administering Closed-Chest 

Heart Massage 

Since closed-chest heart massage always must be combined with 
artificial respiration, it is preferable to have two i-esruers. One 
person positions himself at the soldier's side and performs closed- 



22 



chest heart massage while the other person positions himself on 
the ojiposite side of the soldier at his heatJ, keeps the soldier's head 
tilted back, and administers artificial respiration. If you must 
achiiinister these steps alone, alternate these methods as (Jescrihed 
in parafj:raph 1^-1 3. 

a. I'repare the soldier for the mouth-to-mouth method of artifi- 
cial respiration (para 3-4). The soldier always must he in tlie 
horiKontal position when close<i-cht;st lieart inassaj^e Is performed, 
as there is no hlood flow to the brain when the bo<ly is in a vertical 
position, even during: properly performed closed-chest heart mas- 
saj^^e. The surface on which the soldier is i)lace<l MUST BK SOLID. 
The floor or the i»:roimd is adequate. A bed or couch is too flexible. 
Elevate the le|,^ about 6 inches while keeping the rest of the body 
horizontal. This will help the return of blood to the heart. 

b. Position yourself close to the soldier's side and place the heel 
of one hand on the lower half of the hreastlxme. Be careful NOT to 
place your hand on the soft tissue of the abiJomen below the 
breastbone and rib cage. Spread and raise tlie fingers of your hand 
so that you can apply pressure to the breastbone without pressing 
on the ribs. Place your other hand on to]> of the fust. {If the 
injured person is a child, omit placing the second hand over the 
first. If he is an infant, place only the fingertii>s of one hand on the 
breastbone.) 



3~1 1 . Basic Procedure 

a. With your hands in the correct position, bring your shoulders 
directly over the soldier's breastbone, keep your arms straight, 
and press downward. Apply enough pressure to push the breast- 
bone down IVa to 2 inches (fig 3-8). Too much ])ressure may 
fracture the soldier's ribs; therefore, do NOT push the breastbone 
down more than 2 inches. (If the injured person is a child, press 
the breastbone lightly with only one hand. If he is an infant, i)ress 
the breastbone lightly with your fingers.) 

b. Release the pressure immediately (fig ;i-9). Tlie heel of the 
rescuer's hand should not be removed fioni the chest during 
relaxation, hut pressure on the breastbone should be comi^letely 
released so that it returns to its normal resting jiosition between 
compressions. 

3-12. Measures Applied With Two Rescuers 

a. If there are two rescuers (fig :i-10), one performing artificial 
respiration and the other administering closed-chest heart mas- 

23 




SPIHE 



Figure 3-8^ Blood forced out of the heart into the arteries by application of 

pressure on the breastbone. 



24 




HEART 



SPIHE 
Figure 3-9. Release of pressure to allow the heart to refill with blood. 

sage, the i)erson wlio is administeiing- closed-chest heart nmssa^^e 
should compress the heart o^ice every second (60 compressions i>er 
minute). At this rate he does not pause for breaths to be blown 
into the aii'way. The compressions must be uninterrupted, rey:ular, 
aiiil smootli. Relaxation must imme^liately follow comi)ression utul 
shoidd be of equal duration. Proper timing for 60 compressions per 

25 



minute with a naturjil rliyUiiH is achieved by couiitinjr alou<l as 
follows: one 1000, one 2000, one 3000, one 4000, one 5000. Kach time 
the rescuer says, "one," he compresses the heart; and as he says 
the tlionsan<l luimher, he releases the pressure. He repeats the 
same count to 5000 throuj^hout the entire period he is administer- 
ing closed-chest heart inassage. 

b. Tlie member of the rescue team who is performing artificial 
respiration quickly blows into the soldier's lunp^s after each five 
compressions (5:1 ratio). When the other rescuer says, "5000," this 
is liis siK:nal to blow a <lee]) breath into the soldier's aii-way. The 
breaths are interjected without any pauses in compression. This is 
IMPORTANT, as any interruption in heart compression results in 
a (hop in blood How and blood pressure to zero. 

c. Two rescuers can perform closed-chest heart massafi^e and 
artiricial respiration best when they are on opposite sides of the 
soldier. They can then switch positions when one becomes fati^i^ied 
without any significant intetruption in the 5:1 rhythm. This is 



1 



LUNG INFLATION 

-AFTER EACH 5 

COMPRESSIONS 
-INTERPOSED BETWEEN 

COMPRESSIONS 



© 



BREATHING 




CtlEST COMPRESSIONS 

RATE OF 60/MINOTE 

NO PAUSE FOR 
VENTILATION 







CIRCULATION 



A \ RWAY 



NOTE: THE TWO RESCUERS 
SHOULD BE ON OPPOSITE 
SIDES OF SOLDIER DURING 
THESE PROCEDURES. 



Figure .1-10. Twt) rracurrs nidnifihferiitg clopetl-chpttt heart mtttmoffp find tuimth 

to-nwitfh artificial respiration. 



36 



accomplislied by tlie rescuer who is ])erformins aitificial res])i ra- 
tion moving? to the side of tlie soldier's cliest imnie<Hately after he 
has iiiflate<l the hm^. He places liis liands in tlie air next to those 
of the other rescuer wlio continues to perform heait compression. 
As soon as tlie other rescuer's luiiuis are i)ro])erly place*), the 
rescuer initially performing heart compression removes his haiuls 
(usually after the count of 2000 or 'MM) in the series of oum]>res- 
sions), and the otlier rescuer then contiiujes with the series of 
compressions. The rescuer who has been compressing then moves 
to the soldier's head and interjmses the next breath on tlie coimt 
of 5000. 



3-13. Measures Applied With One Rescuer 

When there is only one rescuer (fig M-l 1), he must i>erform both 
closed-chest heart massage and artificial respiration using a 15:2 
ratio. This ratio consists of 15 heart compressions followed by two 
very quick but full lung inflations. To make up the time used for 
inflating the limg-s, the rescuer must perform eacli series of 15 
heart compressions at the faster rate of 80 compressio7is per 
minute. This timing is achieved by counting aloud as follows: 1 and 
2 and 8 and 4 and 5 and, 1 and 2 and 'A and 4 and 10 and, 1 and 2 
and :t and 4 and 15. After the count of "15," the rescuer blows two 
deep hieatlis into the soldier's aii^way in rapid succession (within a 
period of 5 to (J seconds) without allowing full exhahiti<m between 

the l)reaths. He repeats the same count as he continues resuscita- 
tion. 



3-14. Cessation of Resuscitative Measures 

Cessation of resuscitative measures must not he based ui)on the 
discomfort of the rescuer. It may be necessary to perform these 
lifesaving measures for a long time alter the heavy effects of body 
discomfort and fatigue are felt. They should he contiiujud until the 
victim regains consciousness, until the rescuer is relieved by a 
medically trained person, or for at least 45 minutes in the absence 
of all life signs. 



27 



2 QUICK LUNG 
rNFLATIONj 




15 CHEST COMPRESSJONS 
--RATE OF 80/MINUTE 



NOTE: 

ONLY ONE RESCUER PERFORMrNG 

BOTH PROCEDURES 



Figure S-U. Out reecuer otbninistering closed chettt heart massage and mouth 

to-mouih artificiai reffpiratton. 



28 



CHAPTER 4 
STOP THE BLEEDING (MEASURE B) 



Section I. GENERAL 

4-1. Important of Preventing Loss of Blood 

The open wound is the most common condition whiclt requires 
your Inst aid assistance. Acute loss of blood may lead to shook, and 

shock may lead to death; therefore, you muat act immediately to 
pievent loss of blood. 

4-2. Methods to Control Bleeding 

The use of the pressure dressing is the preferred method for 

controlling severe bleeding. Elevation of the wounded limb an<l 

application of digital pressure should also be used, as appropriate, 

in conjunction with the pressure dressing. The tourniquet can be 

used to control bleeding from a limb. It should not be used, 

however, unless a pi'essure dressing has failed to stop the bleed- 
ing. 

Section IJ. APPLICATION OF PRESSURE DRESSING, ELEVATION 

OF LIMB, AND DIGITAL PRESSURE 

4-3. General 

The application of a sterile tiressing with pressure to a bleeding 
wound heli)s clot formation, compresses the oi>en blood vessels, 
and protects the wound from further invasion of germs. 

4-4. Searching for Entrance and Exit Wounds 

Before applying the pressure diessing, examine the soldier in 
determine whether there is more than one wound. For example, a 
missile may have entered at one point and come out at another 
point. The exit wound is usually larger than the en( ranee wound. 

29 



4—5. Removing the Clothing 

('lit thp c'lotliiiiK niid liH. it awny from the wouthI to nvo'ul further 
ootitaniitiiition. ToiiriiiK the (ilothiii^ miKht result in rou^li han- 
dling of the injured part. Do not tt. h the wound; keep it as clean 
as possible. Jf it is alrea<ly ditty, leave it that way. Uo not try to 
clean it in any way. 




© 





© 




PRESSURE APPLIED TO WOUND 
WITH BAWriAGES 
ATTACHED TO DRESSING 



ADDITIONAL PRESSURE APPLIED 
TO WOUND WITH HAND 





ADDfTIOHAL PREiSURE APPLIED TO WOUND 
WITH THICK PAO(RAG) FIRHLY SECURED WITH 
CRAVAT OR OTHER STRIP OF MATERIAL 



Figure i-1. Application of Presaure dressing. 



30 



4-6. Covering the Wound and Applying Pressure 

a. Cover the wound with a field first aid dressing (individual) and 
apply pressure to the wound by using tlie bandage strips attached 
to the dressing (a, b, c, fig 4-1). 

b. If additional pressure is required to stop the bleeding, place 
your hand over the dressing and press hard <d, fig 4-1). Pressure 
fi-' m your hand may be required for 5 to 10 minutes to allow the 
clot to form. The clot must be strong enough to hold with the help 
of only the dressing and bandage strips when your hand is 
removed. Additional pressure can also be apphed by placiiig a 
thick pad on top of the original dressing at the site of the wound 
and fumiy securing this pad with a cravat oi strip of material (e 
and f, fig 4-1). Do not remove any dressings or bandages once they 
are placed over the wound. Apply any additional dressings over 
the ones in place. Removing a dressing may dislodge clots which 
are partially formed. 

4-7. Elevating the Limb 

Frequently, bleeding can be lessened by raising the injured pait 
above the level of the heart; however, direct pressure must be 
continued. Elevation must not be used if there is a broken bone in 
the injured part. Moving an unsplinted fracture causes pain, can 
increase shock, and may further damage nerves, muscles, and 
blood vessels- 

4-6. Applying Digital Pressure 

If blood is spurting from the wound (arterial bleeding), digital 
pressure can be used to control the bleeding until a pressure 
dressing can be unwrapped and applied. Digital pressure is applied 
to a pressure point with the fingers, the thumbs, or the hands. A 
pressure point is the site at which a main artery supplying the 
wounded area lies near the skin surface or over a bone. By passing 
at this point, the flow of blood from the heart to the wound is shut 
off or at least slowed down (fig 4-2). You will have proi>erly located 
a pressure point when you can feel the pidse at this point. You 
must feel the pulse before api)lyirig the digital jjreasure. 

Section IIL APPLICATION OF TOURNIQUET 

4—9. General 

A tourniquet is a constricting band placed around an arm or leg to 
stop severe bleeding. 

31 



WOUND OF 

LOWER FACE 

(BELOW EYES) 




WOUND OF 
LOWER LEG 



Figure i-S. Pressure points in the circulatory system for temporary control of 

arterial bleeding. 



33 



a. The tourniquet should be used only when pressure over the 
wound area, pressure over the appropriate pressure point, and 
elevation of the wounded part (if it is possible) fail to control the 
bleeding. Its use will rarely be necessary and should be avoided \f 
possible. Use of a tourniquet has on occasion been associated with 
injury to blood vessels and nerves. If it is left on too long, it can 
cause loss of an arm or leg. 

b. Bleeding from a major artery of the thigh, lower leg, or upper 
arm or bleeding from multiple arteries, which occurs in a traumatic 
amputation, may prove to be beyond control by pressure. If the 
first aid dressing under hard hand pressure becomes soaked with 
blood and the wound continues to bleed, you should apply a tour- 
niquet. 

c. Once a tourniquet has been applied, it must stay in place; and 
the soldier must be taken to the nearest medical treatment faciUty 
as soon as possible. 

d. Do not loosen a tourniquet after it has been applied and has 
stopped the bleeding. Shock and blood loss can result in death. 

4—10. The Improvised Tourniquet 

In the absence of a specially designed tourniquet, a tourniquet 
may be made from strong, soft, pliable material such as gauze or 
muslin bandage, clothing, or kerchiefs. An improvised tourniquet 
is used with a rigid stick-like object (fig 4-3). To minimize skin 
damage, insure that the improvised tourniquet is sufficiently wide 
to remain at least 1 inch in width after tightening. 

4—1 1. Placing the Improvised Tourniquet 

a. Place the tourniquet around the limb and between the wound 
and the body trunk (or between the wound and the heart) (fig 4-3). 
Place the tourniquet 2 to 4 inches above the injury. Never place it 
directly over a wound or fracture. 

b. When possible, place the tourniquet over the smoothed sleeve 
or trouser leg to prevent the skin from being pinched or twisted 
(fig 4-3). Damaging the skin may deprive the surgeon of skin 
required to cover the amputation, thus forcing amputation of more 
of the limb than might otherwise be necessary, Pjotection of the 
skin reduces the pain. 

4-12. Tighteing the Tourniquet 

a. Tighten the tourniquet as illustrated in figure 4-3. Tighten it 
only enough to stop blood from passing under it. If a pulse can be 

33 




© 



AROUND THE LIMB; 
TIE WITH SQUARE 
KNOT. 




SQUARE KNOT 



© 



PASS A STICK, 
SCABBARD, OR 
BAYONET UNDER 
THE LOOP. 





TIGHTEN TOURNIQUET 
JUST ENOUGH TO 

STOP ARTERIAL 

BLEEDING, 



© 



BIND FREE END 
OF STICK TO 
LIMB TO KEEP 

TOURNIQUET 
FROM UNWINDING 




Figure 4-.T. Application of an improvised toumtqiiet to etop bleeding. 



34 



felt in the intact wrist or foot of the affected limb before the 
tourniquet is applied, stoppage of this pulse can be used as the 
indicator that tourniquet pressure is sufficient. 

b. To detect a pulse, place two fingers (not the thumb) over the 
pressure point in the wrist or ankle (fig 4-2). Do not use your 
thumb because the small arteries in your thumb may cause a faUe 
pulse reading. If such a pulse cannot be used as an indicaLoi', you 
must rely upon your judgment of reduction of blood flow from the 
wound. In this case, uncover the wound temporarily to observe the 
blood flow. 

c. After a tourniquet is properly tightened, arterial (spurtmg) 
bleeding will immediately cease; but bleeding from veins (para ^ 
16) in the lower part of the hmb will continue until the vessels are 
drained of the blood already in them. Do -not continue to tighten 
the tourniquet in an attempt to stop this drainage. 

4-13. Dressing the Wound 

After the tourniquet has been secured in place, dress and bandage 
the wound (para 6-5). 

4-14. Marking the Soldier 

If the condition of the soldier or the weather makes it necessary to 
cover the soldier, leave the tourniquet exposed so that it can be 
readily seen. If possible, mark him with a T on his forehead and 
indicate the time that the tourniquet was appUed. Once a tourni- 
quet has been applied, it must not be loosened by anyone except 
medical personnel. 



35 



CHAPTER 5 



PREVENT SHOCK (MEASURE C) 



5-1 . General 

a. Shock niny result from any type of injury. The more severe 
the injury, the more likely shock is to develop. 

6. The early sip^na of shock are restlessness, tliirst, pale skin, and 
a rapid heartbeat. A soldier in shock may be excited or he may l)e 
calm and appear very tired. He may be sweating even though his 
skin feeis cool and clammy. As shock becomes worse, he breathes 
in small fast breaths or gasps even when his airway is clear. He 
may stare vacantly into space. His skin may have a blotchy or 
bluish appearance, especially around the lips and mouth. 

c. Your objective is to administer first aid measitres which will 
prevent shock from developing or getting worse, such as elevating 
the soldier's feet, loosening his clothing, and placing covers over 
and under him to prevent chilling (fig 5-1). All of the shock control 
measures described in the following paragraphs help to prevent or 

control shock. 

5-2. Maintain Adequate Respiration and Heartbeat 

To maintain adequate respiration and heartbeat, you may need to 
do nothing more than clear the upper airway (para Ji-4rf(2)), 
position the soldier to insure adequate drainage of any fluid 
obstructing his airway, and observe him to insure that his ainvay 
remains unobstructed. You may need to administer artificial 
respiration and closed-chest heart massage (chap 3). 

5-3. Stop the Bleeding 

Control bleeding by application of pressure dressing, by elevation 
of the part, and by use of pressure points as appropriate (para 4- 
3 — 4-8). Apply tourniquet if necessary (para 4-9 — 4-14). 

36 



5-4. Loosen Constrictive Clothing 

Loosen clothing at the neck and waist and at other areas in which 
the clothing tends to bind the soldier (b, fig 5-1). Loosen but do not 
remove boots or footgear. 



5-5. Reassure the Soldier 

Take charge. Show by your calm self-confidence and gentle yet 
firm actions that you know what you are doing anc tliat you 
expect him to feel better because you are helping him. Be atten- 
tive; initiate conversation only to give instructions or warnings or 
to obtain necessary information. If the soldier asks questions 
regarding the seriousness of his injury, explain that a physician 
will have to examine him in order to determine the extent of 
injury. Remember, ilUimed or erroneous information can increase 
the soldier's anxiety. 



5-6. Splint Fractures 

If the soldier has a fracture, splint the part (chap 8) 



5-7. Position the Soldier 

The position in which a soldier should be placed varies, depending 
upon the type of wound or injury and whether he is conscious or 
unconscious. Unless he has an injury for which a special position is 
prescribed (chap 7 and 8), gently place him on a blanket or a other 
suitable protective item (para 5-8) in one of the following positions: 

a. If he is conscious, place him on his back on a level surface 
with his lower extremities elevated 6 to 8 inches to increase the 
flow of blood to his heart (a, fig 6-1). This may be accomphshed by 
placing his pack or another suitable object under his feet. If he is 
placed on a litter, elevate the foot of the litter. Renitimber how- 
ever, do not move a soldier who lias a fracture imtil it iias been 
properly splinted. 

6. If the soldier is unconscious, place him on his side or on his 
abdomen with his head turned to one side to prevent his choking 
on vomitus, blood, or other fluid (c, fig &-1). 

c. The soldier with a head iiyury should be lying so that bis head 
is in a position higher than his body. 

3/ 




(o) ELEVATE FEET 




© 



LOOSEN CLOTHING 




© 



PLACE COVERS OVER 
AND UNDER SOLDIER 



Figure 5-1, Administerivff first nid to com^cious or unconscious soldier to 

prevent shock. 



38 



5-6. Keep the Soldier Comfortably Warm 

Do not overheat the soldier. If possible place a blanket, a poncho, a 
shelter half, or other suitable material under him. He may or may 
not need a blanket over him, depending upon the weather. If the 
weather permits, remove any wet clothing except boots or footgear 
before covering him. 



39 



CHAPTER 6 

DRESS AND BANDAGE THE WOUND TO AVOID 

INFECTION (MEASURE D) 



Section I. GENERAL 

6—1 . Importance of Protecting the Wound from Further 
Infection 

All wounds are considered to be contaminated, since infection 
producing germs are always present on the skin, on the clothing, 
and in the air. Furthermore, any missile or instrument causing 
the wound pushes or carries germs into it. Infection results from 
the multiplication and growth of the germs which invade the 
wound or a break in the skin. The fact that a wound is contami- 
nated, however, does not lessen the importance of protecting it 
from further contamination. The fewer the germs which invade a 
wound, the less possibility there is of infection and the greater are 
the soldier's chances for recovery. You must, therefore^ dress and 
bandage a wound as soon as possible to protect it from further 
contamination, as well as to stop the bleeding. 

6—2. Dressings 

Dressings are sterile pads or sterile compresses used to cover 
wounds. They are usually made of gauze or cotton wrapped in 
gauze. 

6-3. Bandages 

A bandage may be made of gauze or muslin. It is used over a 
dressing to secure it in place, to close off its edges from dirt and 
germs, and to create pressure on the wound for control of bleeding. 
It is also used to supi>ort an injured part or to secure a splint to an 
injured part. 

40 



Section II. DRESSINGS 

6-4. Types of Dressings 

In the field the most widely used dressing is the field first aid 
dressing with attached bandages (fig 1-1), Other dressings availa- 
ble under certain conditions are gauze compresses of various sizes 
and small sterile compresses on adhesive strips (fig 6-1). For 
availability of these compresses, see appendix B. 






Fiyure S-l, Method of rejtutviiiff sterile cotnpresH (adheaive strip) from wrapper to 

avoid touching compreaa. 



41 






REMOVE WRAPPED DRESSING 
(WITH ATTACHED BANDAGES) 
FROM PLASTIC ENVELOPE; 
THEN TWIST TO BREAK 
PAPER WRAPPER, 



GRASP FOLDED BANDAGES 
WITH HANDS, BEING CAREFUL 
NOT TO TOUCH SIDE OF 
DRESSING WHICH GOES NEXT 
TO WOUND. 





CONTINUING TO HOLD FOLDED BANDAGES, 
PULL DRESSING OPEN, 






PLACE DRESSING ON 
WOUND WITHOUT 
ALLOWING IT TO TOUCH 
ANYTHING ELSE. 




WRAP BANDAGES 
AROUND THE PART 
AND TIE THE ENDS 
SECURELY. 



Figure 6-?. Application of field first aid dressing. 



42 



6-5. Application of Dressings 

a. Cut the clothing and !ift it away from the wound to avoid 
further contamination. 

b. Remove the dressing from its wrapper and place it directly 
over the wound without letting it touch anything else (fig 6-2;. 



Section III. BASIC TYPES OF BANDAGES 

6—6. General 

A bandage must be applied firmly with the ends secured in place 
to prevent the bandage and dressing from slipping. It must not be 
applied so tightly that it stops circulation. If a U /lot is necessary 
for securing a bandage, the square knot (fig 4-3) must be used, 
since it will not slip. 



6-7. Tailed Bandages 

Tailed bandages may he, attached to the dressing as they are in 
the field first aid dressing (fig 6-2). The two tails are split 4 to ti 
inches from the loose en<ls; they may be split faither as requiretl 
to bandage a particular part of the body. Tail bandages may also 
be made by splitting a strip of gauze (4 by 36 inches) from each 
end, leaving the center part intact to cover the dressing, which has 
been placed over the injured part. 



6-8. Triangular and Cravat Bandages 

a. Triangular and cravat bandages (fig 6--3) are made from the 
triangular piece of muslin (37 by 37 by 52 inches) provided in the 
general purpose first aid kit (app B). If this bandage is applied 
without folding it, it is called a triangular bandage. If it is folded 
into a strip, it is called a cravat bandage. Two safety pins are 
packed with each bandage. 

h. These bandages are valuable in an emergency, since they are 
easily applied. They can also be improvised fmm a piece of shirt, 
sheet, kerchief, or any other pliable material of a suitable size. To 
improvise a triangle, cut a square of material somewhat larger 
than 3 by 3 feet and fold it diagonally. If two bandages are needed, 
cut the material along ti ., fold. 

43 



APEX 



END 




AVAT 



Fipure fi--T. TriajtguJnr and cranat bandagen. 



Section IV. BANDAGING OF VARIOUS BODY PARTS 
6-9, Head 

ft. Application of Bandages Attacked to Field First Aid Dressing 
{fig 6~S), 

(1) Place bandage on head as shown in a, figure 6-4, 

(2) Cioss the two front bandages under chin and tie them on 
top of head (b, fi^ fi-4). 

(3) Brinp the ripht rear bandage under clxin to meet left rear 
bandage at a point above ear and secure to other bandages (e, fig 
G-4). Do not cover ear. 



44 



(4) Take rear bandages in opposite directions to other side of 
head and tie them above ear to other bandages with square knot 
(d, fig 6-4). Do not cover ear. 



b. Triangular Bandage Applied to Head. 

(1) Turn base of bandage up and place center of base on center 
of forehead, letting apex fall on back of neck; then take ends 
backward (a, fig ft-6). 

(2) Cross ends over apex; then take them over forehead and tie 
with square knot (b, fig 6-5). 







Figure 6-4. Securing field first aid dresHing to head with attached bandages. 



45 



CENTER OF BASE 




ENDS APEX 



APEX 




END 



APEX 



SAFETY PIN 



Figure 6-6. Applying iriaiiguiar bandage to head. 







Figure 6~€. Appiying cravat haTuiage to head. 



(3) Tuck apex beh:iKi crossed part of bandage and further 
secure it with safety pin, if available (c, fig 6-5)« 

c. Cravat Bandage {fig ^-i?) Applied to Head. 

(1) Place middle of bandage over dressing (a, fig 6-6), 

(2) Pass the two ends of the bandage in opposite directions 
completely around the head and tie them with a square knot over 
the dressing (b and c, fig 6-6). 



46 



6-10. Ear 

The cravat bandage (fig 6-3) is applied to the ear as foUows: 

a. Place middle of bandage over ear (a, fig 6-7). 

b. Cross ends, take them in opposite directions around head, and 
Ue them with square knot (b and c, fig 6-7). 

c. If possible place some dressings l:)etween the ear and the side 
of the head to avoid crushing the ear against the head when the 
bandage is applied. 



6-11. Eyes 

Even though only one eye is injured, both eyes must be bandaged. 
Since both eyes move together, any movement of tlie uninjured 
eye would cause the same movement anu further damage to the 
injured eye. The bandages attached to the field first aid dressing 
(c, fig 1-1) are applied to the eyes as follows: 

a. Take upper bandages on each side (a, fig 6-8) to back of head 
and cross them. Bring bandages around liead and tie them with 
square knot on side of head (b, fig 6-8). 

6. Cross lower bandages on top of head and bring longest 
bandage under chin. Secure bandages to other bandages and tie 
them with square knot (c, fig 6-8). 





© 



Figure 6-7. Applying cravat batutage to ear or eye area. 



47 




Figure 6-8. Securing field first aid dresstJig to eyen with attached bandages. 



6-12. Jaw 

Before applying bandapre to a soldier's jaw, take any removable 
dentures (full or partial) from his mouth and put them in hi.'^ 
pocket. In applying the bandage, allow the jaw enough freedom to 
permit passage of air and drainage from the mouth. To avou! 
bandaging the mouth completely closed, place a wad of material 
with a thickness of approximately one-eighth inch between tbo 
upper and lower teeth and gums. To insure that this wad o\ 
material does not fail into the mouth and block the airway, leavt- 
streamers of the material attached to the wad and tie them to the 
bandage. 

a. Ap])lication of Bandages Attached to Field First Aid Dressim; 
{fig 6-S). After placing the dressing over the wound, apply th< 
bandages, using the same technique illustrated in figure 6-4. 

b. Cravat Bandage (fig G^) Applied to Jaw. 



4B 




^■■■■^^:/^^/ 







^--Fr^-J—': 



Fif/ure 6-9. Applying cravat bandage (o jaw. 

(1) Place bandage under chin and carry ends upward. Adjust 
bandage to make one end longer than the other (a, fig 6-9). 

(2) Take longer end over top of head to meet short end at 
temple. Cross ends (b^ fig 6-9). 

(3) Take ends in opposite directions to other side of head and 
tie them with square knot over part of bandage applied first (c, fig 
6-9). 

(4) Tie mouth wad streamers to bandage. 



6-13. Shoulder 

a. Application of Bandages Attached to Field First Aid Dressing 
{fig 6-10). 

<1) Take one bandage across chest and the other across back 
and under arm opposite to injured shoulder. 

(2) Tie ends with square knot. 

b. Cravat Bandage {fig 6-3) Applied to Shoulder or Armpit. 

(1) Extend length of cravat bandage by placing end of one 
triangular bandage along middle of another one, folding the two 
bandages into a single cravat, and securing the thicker part with 
one or more safety pins. 



49 




Figure 6-10. Securing field first aid dressing to shoulder with attached bandages 




Figure 6-11. Applying cravat bandage to shoulder or armpit. 

(2) Place middle of cravat bandag"e under armpit so that front 
end is longer than back end and safety pins are on the outside (a, 

(3) Cross ends on top of shoulder (b, fig 6-11). 

(4) Take one end across back and under arm on opposite side 
and otlier end across chest. Tie ends with square knot (c, fig 6-11), 



50 



(5) Be sure and place sufficient wadding in the armpit an<i do 
not tie the cravat bandage too tightly so as to avoid compressing 
the major blood vessels in the armpit. 



6-14. Elbow 



6-3) 



a. Bend arm at elbow and place middle of cravat at point of 
elbow (a, fig e-12). 

b. Bring ends up and across, extending one downward and one 
upward (b, fig 6-12). 

c. Take each end around arm and tie with square knot at front of 
e:bow (c, fig 6-12). 

6-15. Hand 

a. Triangular Bandage (fig 6^) Applied to the Hand. 

(1) Place hand in middle of triangular bandage with wrist at 
base of bandage (a, fig 6-13). Insure that fingers are separated with 
absorbent material to prevent chafing and irritation of skin. 

(2) Place apex over fingers and tuck excess fullness into pleats 
on each side of hand (b, fig 6-13). 

(3) Cross ends on top of hand, take them around wrist, and tie 
them in square knot (c, d, and e, fig 6-13). 




Figure 6-12. Applyiny cravat bandage to elbow. 



51 




o 



Figure €-13. Applying triangular bandage to hand. 




Figure «-/4. Applying cravat bandage to palm of hand. 



52 



6. Cravat Bandage (fig 6-3) Applied to Palm of Hand. 

(1) Lay middle of cravat over palm of hand with ends hanging 
down each side (a, fig 6-14). 

(2) Take thumb end across back of hand, over palm, and 
through hollow between thumb and palm (b, fig 6-14). 

(3) Take other end across back of hand, extending it upward 
over base of thumb; then bring it downward across palm (c, fig 6- 
14). , 

(4) Take ends to back of hand and cross; then bring them to 
front of hand and cross again (d and e, fig 6-14). 

(5) Tie ends with a square knot at wrist (f, fig 6-14). 



6-16. Knee 

Apply cravat bandage to knee as illustrated in figure 6-15, using 
the same technique described in paragrajih (>-H. 



6-17. Leg 

The cravat bandage (fig 6-3) is applied to the leg as follows: 
a. Place center of cravat over dressing (a, fig 6-16). 

6. Take one end around and up the leg in a spiral motion and the 
other end around and down the leg in a spiral motion, overlapping 
part of each preceding turn (b, fig 6-16). 

c. Bring both ends together and tie with square knot (c, fig 6-16). 





FHyure 6-15. Applying cravat i}atidage to knee. 



53 






Figure R-I6, Appiyi7i{y cravat bayidage to leg 




Figure 6-17. Appfying trim^^zdar bandage to foot. 



54 



6-16. Foot 

The trianguUir bandage (fig &-3) is applied to foot as follows: 

a. Place foot in middle of triang:nlar bandage with heel well 
forward of base (a, f^g 6-17). Insure that toes are separated with 
absorbent material to prevent chafing and irritation of L .e skin. 

b. Place apex over top of foot and tuck excess fullness into pleats 
on each side of foot (b, fig &-17). 

c. Cross ends on top of foot, take them around ankle, and tie 
them in square knot at front of ankle (c, d, and e, fig f>-17). 



55 



PART THREE 
SPECIAL FIRST AID MEASURES 



CHAPTER 7 
FIRST AID FOR SEVERE WOUNDS AND BURNS 



Section I. INTRODUCTION 



7-1. General 



The lifesavinp: measures A, B, C, and D, discussed in chapters 3 
through 6, apply to first aid measures for all injuries. Certain 
types of wounds and burns, however, require special precautions 
and procedures or modifications in the four basic measures. 

7-2. Types of Wounds and Burns Requinng Special First Aid 
Measures 

These injuries inchide head injuries, face and neck wounds, suck- 
ing wounds of the chest, abdominal wounds, and bums, as well as 
fractures. Fractures will be discussed in chapter 8. 



Section II. HEAD INJURIES 



7-3. General 



A head injury may consist (-f one of the foiiowin^? conrlitions or of a 
combination of tliem: a cut or bruise of the scalp; a fracture of the 
skuU with injury to the brain and/or to the blood vessels of the 
scalp, skull, and brain. Usually, serious skull fractures and brain 
injuries occur tosether; however, it is possible to receive a serious 
brain injury without a skull fracture. 



56 



7-4. Signs and Symptoms 

A head miury with scalp wound is easily recogriized. Injury of the 
head without a scalp wound is more difficult to recog-nize. You 
should, therefore, suspect a head injury and act accordingly if the 
soldier — 

a. Is or has recently been unconscious. 

b. Has blood or other fluid escaping from his nose or ears. 

c. Has a slow pulse (para 5^-16(2)). 

d. Has a ^eadache. 

e. Is nauseated or is vomiting. 
/. Has had a convulsion. 

g. Is breathing" very slowly. 

7-5. Special Precautions in A, B, C, and D Lifesaving 
Measures 

(chaps 3 through 6). 

a. Leave any protruding brain tissue as it is, and apply a sterile 
dressing over this tissue. Furthermore, do not remove or disturb 
any foreign matter which may be in the wound. 

b. The soldier should be lying so that his head is in a position 
higher than his body. 

c. For proper application of bandages to the head, see paragraph 
6-9. 



Section 111. FACE AND NECK WOUNDS 

7-6. General 

Wounds of the face and neck bleed profusely because of the many 
blood vess*'ls in these parts. Furthermore, the bleeding is difficult 
to control. 

7-7. Special Precautions and Modifications to A, B, C, and D 
Lifesaving Measures 

(chaps 3 through 6). 

a. First, stop any bleeding which may be causing obstruction of 
the soldier's upper airway. Then clear his aii^way (para 3-4d(2)). 

57 



There may be pieces of broken teeth or bone and ioose bits of flesh, 
as well as dentures, in his mouth. 

fe. If the soldier is conscious and chooses to sit up, have him lead 
forward with his head down to permit free drainage from his 
mouth; otherwise, place him the shock position for an unconscious 
person (c, fig: 5-1), even though he may be ctnscious, to permit 
drainage from his mouth. 

Section iV. SUCKING WOUNDS OF THE CHEST 

7-8. General 

A chest wound which results in air being sucked into the chest 
cavity is particularly dangerous. This will cause the lung on the 
injured side to collapse (fig 7-1). The soldier's life may, therefore, 
depend upon how quickly you make the wound airtight. Be sure to 
examine the soldier carefully so that you do not miss a second or 
exit wound (para 4-4). 




Figure 7-1. Sticking wound of the chest 



58 



7-9. Special Precautions, Procedures, and Modifications to A, 
B, C, and D Lifesaving Measures 

(chap 3 through 6). 

a. Have the soldier forcibly exhale (breathe out), if possible, and 
hold his breath while you seal the wound. 

(1) Seal the wound airtight by applying a piece of plastic or 
foil, such as the dressing wrapper or the foil-lined envelope which 
contains the burn salt solution, directly over the wound. Apply the 
first aid dressing over the plastic and have an assistant or the 
soldier exert pressure on the dressing with his open hand while 

you secure the bandages attached to the dressing around his body 
(a and b, fig 7-2), 

Note: If petrolatum gauze is available (app B), it aliould be applied directly 
over the wound. 

(2) Apply a strip of bandaging material torn from clothing, a 
shelter half, or a blanket, et cetera, or apply a folded poncho over 
the dressing and around the soldier's body to creat further 
pressure, thus making the wound aiilight. Each turn of this 



© 



FIELD FIRST AID 
DRESSING 



PRESS DRESSING FIRMLY 
OVER THE WRAPPER TO 
STOP FLOW OF AIR, 





EXERT PRESSURE WITH 
THE OPEN HAND. 



COVER DRESSING 
^^^' ' " COMPLETELY WITH 
BANDAGING MATERIAL 
OR FOLDED PONCHO AND 
SECURE IT WITH BELTS. 



Figure 7-2. Sealing a sucking wound of the chest. 



59 



banda^ng material must overlap the preceding one in order to 
provide firm, evenly distributed pressure over the entire dressing. 

(3) Secure the bandages with the soldier's belts. 

b. If the soldier finds it more comfortable to sit up, allow him to 
do so. Sitting up makes breathing less difficult, as abdominal 
pressure is relieved and the diaphragm muscle functions easier. If 
he chooses to lie down, encourage him to lie on his injured side so 
that the lung on his uninjured side can receive more air. Also, the 
surface on which he is lying serves somewhat as a splint to the 
injured side and thus decreases pain. 



Section V, ABDOMINAL WOUNDS 

7-10. General 

The most serious abdominal wound is one in which an object 
penetrates the abdominal wall and pierces internal organs or large 
blood vessels. 

7-1 1 . Special Precautions and Modifications to A, B, C, and 

D Lifesoving Measures 

(chap 3 through C). 

a. Do not touch or try to push protruding organs such as 
intestines back into the wound; apply one or more sterile dressings 
over them (a and b, fig 7-3). If it is necessary to move an expose*! 
intestine onto the abdomen in order to cover the wound ade- 
quately, then do so. Secure the dressings in place with bandages (c, 
fig 7^); but do not apply them tightly, as internal bleeding cannot 
be controlle<l by pressure and excessive pressure can cause addi- 
tional injury. 

h. Do not give or allow the soldier to take anything by mouth, 
since it will eventually pass through the injured intestines and 
spread contamination in the abdomen. The soldier's lips may be 
moistened to help lessen his thirst. 

c. Leave him on his back, but turn his head to one side (c, fig 7- 
3). Since he will likely vomit, watch him closely to prevent him 
from choking. 

60 




© 



DO NOT TRY TO REPLACE 
PROTRUDING ORGANS, 



© 



COVER WOUND AND ORGANS 
WITH DRESSINGS. 




BANDAGE SECURELY. 



Figure 7-^. Firai aid for an abdomhtal wound. 



Section Vl. SEVERE BURNS 



7—1 2. General 



If a soldier has a burn which is bUstered or charred, special fii-st 
aid measures are required. The prhiiary objective is to prevent or 
lessen shock and infection. 

7-13. Special Precautions, Procedures, and ModiFications to 

Ar B, C, and D Lifesaving Measures 

(chap 3 through 6). 

a. Protect the bum against further contamination, thus lessen- 
ing the possibilities of infection: 

(1) If clothing covers the burn, cut and lift it gently away 
without touching the bum. 

(a) Do not try to remove pieces of cloth which have stuck to 
the burn or to clean the burn in any way. 

6T 



** ^-h-^ 



kl.^ 



ib) Do not pull clothes over the burned area. 

(c) Do not break bliRters. 

(d) Do not put ointment or any medication whatsoever on 

the burn. 

(2) Place a sterile dressinp: over the burned area and secure it 
in place with bandages. In a mass casualty situation, a clean sheet 
may be used in tlie absence of sufficient dressinp:s. 

h. Prevent shock by applying the measures discussed in chapter 
5 and outlined as follows: 

(1) If the soldier is conscious, is not vomiting, and has no 
abdominal or neck wound, give him the sodium chloride-sodium 
bicarbonate mixture included in the first aid case. Dissolve one 
envelope (4.5 grams) of the mixture in one canteenfu! or quart of 
cool or cold water. Never use warm water, since warm salt water 
often causes vomiting. 

Notp: If Uip sodium cliloride-Bodium bicarbonate mixture in not nvailnl.lr. 
(li'.^^olve Four Armv issue salt tablets and two sodium bicarbonate tablets or one- 
balf teaapoonfiil of loose salt and one-fourth teaspoonful of baking soda in one 
canteeriful or quart of cool or cold water. If only salt is available, use it w.tbo.it 
the Boda. 

(2) Give the solution to the soldier slowly, having him consume 
the entire amount over a 1-hour period. Should he become nau- 
seated, stop giving him the solution to prevent vomitmg and 
further loss of fluids; but keep the solution available for hun to 
drink later. This solution helps restore body fluids and salts. 

(3) If the soldier is wearing a protective mask (fig 7-4), turn 
the valve handle to the right, thus moving the drinking tube on 
the inside of his mask into his mouth; then insert the tube on the 
outside of his mask into the Ml Protective Canteen Cap on his 
canteen, making sure that a tight seal is effected. Tilt the canteen 
upward and then downward in the appropriate positions for the 
soldier to drink the solution described above. 



62 




Figure 7-U. AdminUiraimn oforalJJnidB in a toxic environment. 



63 



- W^ ll^i-B-' ■- 



CHAPTER 8 
IMMOBILIZATION OF FRACTURES 



Section I INTRODUCTION 



8-1, General 

Fractures (broken bones) can cause total disability or death of a 
soldier. On the other hand, they can more often be treated so there 
is complete recovery. A great deal depends upon the first aid the 
soldier receives before he is moved. First aid includes immobiliKa- 
tion of the fractured part in addition to the application of lifesav- 
ing measures A, B, C, and D as required. A basic splinting 
principle is to immobilize the joints above and below any fracture. 

8-2. Kinds of Fractures (fig 8-1) 

a. Closed Fracture. A closed fracture is a break in the bone 
witr.out a break in the overlying skin. In a closed fracture there 
may be tissue damage beneath the skin. Even though an injury 
may be a dislocation or sprain, it should be considered as a closed 
fracture for purposes of applying first aid. 

b. Open Fraeture. An open fracture is a break in the bone as well 
as in the overlying skin. The broken bone may have come through 
the skin, or a missile such as a bullet or shell fragment may have 
gone through the flesh to the bone. An open fracture is contami- 
nated and is subject to infection. 

8-3. Signs and Symptoms of a Fracture 

A fracture is easily recognized when the bone is protruding 
through the skin, the part is in an unnatural position, or the chest 
virall is caved in. Other indications of a fracture are tenderness or 
pain when slight pressure is applied to the injured part and 



64 





o \ CLOSED FRACTURE 




OPEN FRACTURE 




OPEN FRACTURE PRODUCED BY MISSILE 



Kigure 8-1. Kinds of lower extremity fracturee. 



65 



swelling as well as discoloration of the skin at the site ot the 
injury. Deep, sharp pain when the soldier attempts to move the 
part is also a si^ of a fracture. Do not, however, encourage the 
soldier to move a part in order to identify a fracture, since 
movement of the part would cause further damage to surrounding 
tissues and promote shock. If you are not sure whether or not a 
Ijone is fractured, treat the injury a3 a fracture. 

8^. Purpose of Immobilizing a Fracture 

A hody part which contains a fracture must be immobilized t<> 
prevent the raz.or-sharp edges of the bone from moving an<l 
cutting tissue, muscle, blood vessels, and nerves. Furthermore, 
immobilization greatly reduces pain and helps to prevent or 
control shock. In a closed fracture, immobilization keeps bone 
fragments from causing an open wound (fig &-1) and thus prevents 
contamination and possibly infection (para &-1). Immobilization is 
accomplished by sphnting. 

8-5. Rules for Splinting 

If the fracture is an open one, first stop the bleeding; then apply v 
dressing and bandage (chap 6) as you would for any other wound 

a Apply the proven principle "Splint them where they lie." Thi: 
means to spHnt the fractured part before any movement of tht 
soldier is attempted and without any change in the position of th. 
fractured part. If a bone is in an unnatural position or a joint v. 
bent, do not try to straighten it If a joint is not bent, do not try t< 
bend it If circumstances make it essential to move a soldier with ^ 
fracture of a lower extremity before a splint can be applied, uk. 
the uninjured leg as a sphnt by tying the fractured one to it; thei 
grasp the soldier beneath the armpits and pull him in a straigh 
line only. Do not roll him or nwve him sideways. 

b. Apply a splint so that the joint above the fracture and th 
joint below the fracture are immobilized. 

c Use padding between the injured part and the splint t 
prevent undue pressure and further injury to tissue, blood vessel 
and nerves. This is especially important at the crotch, m tli 
armpit, and on places where the splint comes in contact with bon 
parts such as the elbow, wrist, knee, and ankle joint. 

d. Bind the splint with bandages at several points above ai 
below the fracture, but do not bind so tightly that it interfen 
with the flow of blood. No bandage should be applied across tl 



66 



fracture. Tie bandages so that the knot is against the splint, and 
tie them with a square knot. 

e. Use a sling to support a sphnted arm which is bent at tlie 
elbow, a fractured elbow which is bent, a sprained arm, and an 
arm with a painful wound, 

8-6, Splints, Padding, Bandages, and Slings 

a. Splints. Sphnts may be improvised from such items as boards, 
poles, sticks, tree limbs, carbines, rifles, rolled magazines or news- 
papers, and cardboard. If nothing is available for a splint, the 
chest wall can be used to immobilize a fractured arm; and the 
uninjured leg can be used to immobilize, to some extent, a 
fractured leg. 

Caution: If weapons are used as splints, be absolutely sure they are 
unloaded. 

b. Padding. Padding may be improvised from such items as a 
jacket, blanket, poncho, shelter half, or leaiy vegetation. 

c. BandageB. Bandages may be improvised from belts, rifle 
slings, bandoleers, handkerchiefs, or slips torn from such items as 

clothing and blankets. Narrow materials such as wire or cord 

should not be used to secure a splint in piace. 

d. Slinga. Slings may be improvised by using the tail of a coat or 
shirt, belts, and pieces torn from such items as clothing and 
blankets. The triangular bandage is ideal for this purpose. 



Section IL IMMOBILIZATION METHODS 

8-7. Upper Extremities 

Figures 8-2 through 8-8 illustrate the application of splints, slings, 
and cravats for immobihzing and supi)orting fractures of the 
upper extremities. Although the padding is not visible in some of 
the figures, it is applied along the injured part for the length of the 
splint- 



67 




METHOD I 




HETHOO II 



Fiffure 8-S. Application of a triangular haiviage to form a sling (two methods) 



68 




PADDING 



SITE 
OF FRACTURE 




CRAVATS 
ABOVE 
FRACTURE 



- - .' H - " - 



-■:.vrVr- 



CRAVATS 
BELOW 
FRACTURE 

KNOTS 
TIED AGAINST 

BOARD 
BOARD 
SPLINTS 




CRAVATS 

TO IMMOBILIZE 
ARM 



Figure S~3. Board aplinta applied to fractured ann or elbow wfteti elbow is not 

bent 



69 




/^BELT, PISTOL BELT, 
vV AND BANDOLEER 



ABOVE 
FRACTURE 



SITE 
OF 

FRACTURE 



BELOW 
FRACTURE 



® 



STRIPS FROM 
CLOTHING OR 
BLANKET 




Figrn-e HA, Chest wall u..d as .plint for vpper nrm fracture «-/..». vo .plhn .. 



available. 



CRAVAT 



SECURED 

WITH 
SAFETY PIN 




SLJNG 



:=>^^:->>/?//:--':/-'^-:>^ 



Fip.-r, S^. Cke.t .all. .(m«, a«d cravat u.ed ,o immobilize a fractured elbo,. 

when elbow is bent. 



70 



© 



BOARD 
SPLINT 



® 



CRAVATS 
ABOVE AND BELOW 
FRACTURE WITH KNOTS 
TIED AGAINST BOARD 



PADDING 




CRAVAT 




SJTE 
OF 
FRACTURE 



CRAVAT 
TO SECURE 
HAND AND 

WRIST 



SLJNG 



Figure S^, Board aplini applied to fractured j 



oreami. 



71 



.^^.F^friJl^^ 1^|^_ rr. -■ =^^^Wtt[VfrMl 




STRIP FROM 
CLOTHING 
OR BLANKET 



Figure 8-7, Fmcturrd foreman or wrist splinted with flOcfcn a^id suppoHed w,ih 

tail of shirt and strips of material. 



72 




PADOING 



BOARD 
SPLINT 



CRAVAT 
TO SECURE 
SPLiHT 



SITE OF 

FRACTURE 



PADDING 
IN PALH 
OF HMD 



SLING 



Figure 8-S, Board splint applied to fractured wriat and hand. 



73 



mtm wi^ 



AhHi-n 



r^4j^_k^ .4ib h .4 A- .huLL__| -.._--_ 







8-8. Lower E ttremities 

F'ipnres R-9 tinou^li R-13 illustrate the application of splints for 
iniinobilizing fractures of the lower extremities. Although the 
paddinp: is not visible in some of the fi^'ires, it is applied along the 
injured part for the length of the splint. 



PADDING 



SITE OF 
FRACTURE 



BOARD SPLINTS 








CRAVAT TO SECURE ANKLE 
(PLACED UMDER SPLINTS, 
CROSSED ON TOP OF BOOT, 
CROSSED ON SOLE OF BOOT, 
TIED ON TOP OF BOOT) 

CRAVATS PLACED 
ABOVE AND BELOW 
FRACTURE WITH KNOTS 
TIED AGAINST BOARD 



CRAVAT TO 
SECURE SPLINT 



CRAVAT 
TO SECURE 
FRACTURED LEG 
TO OTHER ONE 



Figure 8-9. Board uplints applied to fractured kip or thigh. 



74 



FRACTURED 
KNEE 



BOARD 
SPLJNT 



PADDING 




CRAVAT TO SECURE ANKLE 
(CUPPED UNDER HEEL, 
CROSSED ON TOP OF BOOT, 
CROSSED ON SOLE OF BOOT, 
TIED ON TOP OF BOOT) 



CRAVATS PLACED 
ABOVE AND 3EL0W 
FRACTURE WITH KNOTS 
TIED AGAINST BOARD 



t'iyiire H-IO. Board aplint appiied io fractured or dislocated knee. 

CRAVAT TO 

SECURE ANKLE 
(PLACED UNDER SPLINTS, 
CROSSED ON TOP OF BOOT, 
CROSSED ON SOLE OF BOOT, 
TiED ON TOP OF BOOT) 



SITE OF FRACTURE 





PADDING / 


CRAVATS PLACED 


/ 

BOARD 

SPLINTS 


ABOVE AND BELOW 
FRACTURE WITH 
KNOTS TIED 




AGAINST BOARD 



CRAVAT 
TO SECURE 
SPLINTS 



CRAVAT 

TO SECURE 
FRACTURED 

LEG TO OTHER ONE 

Figure 8-11. Board aplinta applied to fractured lower leg or ankle 




75 




BLANKET AND POLES 





© 



SPLINT APPLIED FOR 
FRACTURED THIGH OR 

HIP 



BLANKET AND POLES 




© 



SPLINT APPLIED FOR 
FRACTURED LOWER LEG, 
KNEE, OR ANKLE 



Figure K-IS. Application of nplijitit to lower extremity fractureti, using potetf 

r<}Ued in a blanket. 



PISTOL BELT 

BELT 

BANDOLEER \ cRAVAT 




Figure ft-lX. Uninjured leg used ae splint for fractured one. 



76 



^ 



8-9. Jaw, Collarbone, and Shoulder 

a. Apply a cravat to immobilize a fractured jaw as illustrated in 
figure 6-9. Direct all bandaging support to the top of the soldier's 
head and not to the back of his neck, since the latter pulls the jaw 
back, thus interfering with his breathing. 

b. Apply two belts, a sling, and cravat to immobilize a fractured 
collarbone, as illustrated in figure &-14. 




CRAVAT 



SECURED 

WITH SAFETY 

PIN 



SLING 



Figure 8-lU. Apiiiicaiion oflteltB, sling, and cravat to immobilize a collarbone. 

c. Apply a sling and a cravat to immobilize a fractured or 
dislocated shoulder, using the technique illustrated in figure 8-15. 



77 






SITE OF 
FRACTURE 







CRAVAT 




SECURED 

WITH 
SAFETY PIN 



SLING 



Figure 8-15, Ajyplication of sling and cravat to immobilize a fractured or 

dislocated shoulder. 



8-10. Spinal Column 

It is often impossible to be sure whether or not a soldier has a 
fractured spinal column. Be suspicious of any back injury, espe- 
cially if the soldier has faUen or his back has been sharply struck 
or bent. If a soldier has received such an injury and lie lacks 
feeling in his legs or lacks the ability to move them, you can be 



7B 



Ueated as a fracture. You must remember tl.at, if tl.ere is a 
fracture bendmg the spinal column can cause the sharp bone 

dialysis. I be spmal column must maintain a swayback position 
to remove pressure from the spinal cord (fig 8-16). ?"«'"<>" 

'^■^Steps To Follow Jfth^ Soldier Is Not To Be Transported Until 
Medical Personnel Arnve. i-t^i^ uniu 

(1) If the soldier is conscious, caution him not to move. 

(2) Leave him in the position in which he is found. Do not 
move any body part. 

(3) If he is lyine: with his face up, slip a blanket or material of 
s.m.lar size under the arch of his back to support the spinal 
column m a swayback position (b, fig 8-lG). If he is lying with his 
face down, do not put anything under any part of his body. 

b. Steps To Follow If the Soldier Must Be Transported to Safe 
Location Bejore Medical Personnel Arrive. 

(1) Face-up position. If the soldier is lying with his face up 
transportation must be by litter or a firm s.Jf^stitute such a. a 

FRACTURE 




®IN THIS POSITION, BONE FRAGMENTS 
MAY BRUISE OR CUT THE SPINAL CORD 



FRACTURE 




® 



IN THIS POSITION, BONE FRAGMENTS 
ARE IN PROPER PLACE AND WILL 
NOT BRUJSE OR CUT THE SPINAL 
CORD. 



Figure 8-16. Fracture of spinal column. 



79 



wide board or a Oat door longer than the soldier is tall. Tie his 
wrists together loosely over his waistUne with a cravat or strip ol 
cloth. Lay a folded blanket across the litter where the arch of his 
back is to be placed. Usin^ a four-man team (fi^ R-H). place the 
soldier on the htter without bending his spinal column: 

(a) Kneeling on the knee nearer the soldier's feet, No. 2, :i- 
and 4 men position themseives on one side of the soldier. No. 1 
man positions himself on the opposite side. No. 2, 3, and 4 plact^ 
their hands as ilUistrated in figure 8-17. No. 1 assists m liftmg at 
the site of the fracture. 

(6) All men in close coordination gently lift the soldier aboui 
8 inches; then No. 1 slides the litter under the soldier, insures that 
the blanket is in proper position, and returns to his origmai 
position. 



WRISTS TIED LOOSELY 




FiQiire 8-17. Placing a soldier with a fractured back onto a Htter, 



80 



(c) All men in close coordination gently lower the soldier 
onto the litter. 

(2) Face-douni position. If the soKiier is lying with his face 
down, he must be transported in this same position. Using the 
four-man team, Uft him onto a regular litter or a blanket ix>ll litter 
(para 10-6), keeping the spinal column in a swaybaok |X)sition. If a 
regular litter is to be used, first place a folded blanket on the litter 
at the point wViere the chest will be placed. 

8-11. Neck 

A fractured neck is extremely dangerous. Bone fragments may 
bruise or cut the spinal cord just as in the case of a fractured back. 

a. Steps To Follow If the Soldier Is Not To Be TranspoHed Until 
Medical Personnel Arrive. 

(1) If the soldier is conscious, caution him not to move. Moving 
may cause death. 

(2) Leave the soldier in the position in which he is found. If the 
neck is in an abnormal position, immobilize it in this position ((4) 
below). 





ROLL OF 
CLOTH 



BOOTS 



® 




Fiaure H-lii. Immobilization of a fractured neck. 



81 



L - K 



^ -\ -^ 



(3) If he is lyinp: with his face up, keep his head still, raise ills 
Khoiildei-R slightly, and slip a roll of cloth which has the bulk of a 
bath towel under his neck (a, fig: 8-18). The roil should be thick 
enough to arch the neck only slightly, leaving the back of his head 
on the ground. Do not bend the neck or head forward. Do not raise 
or twist the head. 

(4) Immobilize the soldier's head {b, fig 8-18). This may be 
accomplished by padding heavy objects such as rocks or his boots 
and placinpr them on each side of his head. If it is necessary to use 
his boots, they should Hrst be fdled with stones, gravel, sand, or 
dirt and tied tightly at the top. It may be necessary to stuff pieces 
of material in the tops of the boots to secure the contents, 

b. Steps To Follow If the Soldier Mitst Be Prepared for Transpor- 
tation Before Medical Personnel Arrive. The services of at least two 
persons are necessary to prepare a soldier with a fractured neck 
for transportation because the head and trunk must be moved in 
unison. The two persons must work in close coordination to avoid 
ben<ling the neck in any way. The proper procedure is described as 
follows: 

(1) Place a wide board lengthwise beside the soldier. It should 
extent at least 4 inches beyond his head and feet (a, fig 8-19). 

(2) If the soldier is lying with his face up, No. 1 man steadies 
his head and neck between his hands while No. 2 man with one 
foot and one knee placed against the board to prevent it from 
slipping grasps the soldier at his shoulder and hip and gently 
slides him onto the board (b, fig 8-19). 

(3) If the soldier is lying with his face down, No. 1 man steadies 
the soldier's head and neck between his hands while No. 2 man 
gently rolls him over onto the board (c, fig 8-19). 

(4) No. 1 man continues to steady the soldier's head and neck 
while No. 2 man raises his shoulders slightly^ places padding under 
his neck (a(3) above), and immobilizes his head. The head may be 
immobiliKed with his boots, with stones roiled in pieces of blanket, 
or with other material (d, fig 8-19). 

(5) Secure any improvised supports ((4) above) in position with 
a cravat or strip of cloth extended across the soldier's forehead 
and under the board (d, fig 8-19). 

(6) Lift the board onto a litter or blanket, as available, to 
transport him (e, fig 8-19). 



82 







:■'■ - 



'sr 



Figure S-19. Preparing a aoldier with a fractured ueck for trauaportation. 



83 



CHAPTER 9 
FIRST AID FOR COAAMON EMERGENCIES 



9-K Minor Wounds 

MoRt Kmall wounds, such as cuts, do not usually bleed very mudi. 
Infection from contaniitmtion (para 6-1) is the principal danprer. If 
you receive a tninor wound, take the following first aid measures: 

a. Do not allow anything to touch the wound, except as described 
in b and c below. 

b. Wash the surrounding skin thoroughly with soap and water. 
Gently clean the wound. If a disinfectant solution (tincture of 
benzalkonium or another acceptable solution) is available, apply it 
to the wound. (In no instance should solutions stronger than 1:750 
be used.) 

c. Place a sterile compress over the wound without allowing it to 
touch anything else and secure it in place with a bandage. 



9-2 » Minor Burns 

Minor burns may be caused by exposure to dry heat, hot liquids, 
chemicals, electricity, or rays of the sum If you receive a minor 
hiun, you should immerse it or flush it with the coldest water 
available until the pain subsides (usually about 5 minutes). Minor- 
burns are of two types: 

a. Small Biirtifi Which Include Blistering or Charring. Since the 
skin is most hkely to break when it is blistered or charred, cover it 
with a sterile compress to protect it from contamination and 
possible infection. Do not attempt to break the blisters. Secure the 
compress in place with a bandage. 

6. Bwrns With No Blistering or Charring, If the burn does not 
cause the skin to blister, cliar, or break, it is a minor burn even 

84 



though it may cover a large area of the body, as in mild sunburn 
It IS not necessaiy to cover such a burn with sterile compress, 

9-3. Foreign Body in the Eye 

a. If a foreign particle gets into the eye, do not rub the eye If 
the pai-ticie is beneath the upper eyelid, grasp the eyelashes of the 
upfHjr lid and pull the lid up and away from contact with the 
surface of the eyeball. Hold the eyelid in this manner until tears 
flow freely. The tears will fi-equently Hush out the particle. If this 
teclmiqne fails, attempt to remove it as shown in figure 9-1. 

6. If the foreign particle is glass or metal or it cannot be removed 
by the techniques described in a above and illustrated in figure &- 
1, bandage both of the soldier's eyes (fi^ 0^8) and get him to a 
medical treatment facility. 

Note: If only one eye is bandaged, the soldier will use his unaffected eye Since 
«ye movements are synchronized, use of the unaffected eye may result in 
movement of tlie affected one, thereby subjecting' it to further injury. 

c. If caustic or irritating material, such as battei-y acid, ammo- 
nia, et cetera, gets into the eye, immediately hush it with a large 
volume of water. To flush the riglit eye, turn the head to the right 
side; to flush the left eye, turn the head to the lea side. This 
prevents the caustic or irritating material from being washed into 
the other eye. The soldier should he imme<liate!y evacuated to the 
nearest medical treatment facility for care to prevent further 
damage. 

9-4. Foreign Body in the Ear, Nose, or Throat 

a. Never probe in an attempt to remove a foreign body from tlie 
ear. An insect in the ear may be removed simply by attracting it 
with a flashlight held to the ear. If this fails, it may be drowned or 
immobilized by pouring water into the ear. Foreign objects in tlie 
ear can sometimes be flushed out with water. However if the 
object IS something which will swell when wet, such as a seed or 
particle of wood, do not pour water into the ear. 

b Probing into the nose will generally jam a foreign object 
tighter. Damage to the nasal passages can also result. Try to 

remove the object by gently blowing the nose. If this fails seek 
medical aid. 

c. Coughing will frequently dislodge a foreign object from the 
throat. If this fails and the object can be reached, try to remove it 
with the fingers; but be careful to avoid misiiing it farther down 

85 



,.9/M 



h- 




© 



INSPECT EYEBALL AND 

LOWER LID. GENTLY 
REMOVE OBJECT WITH 
MOIST CLEAN CORNER 
OF HANDKERCHIEF. 



® 



A 





IF THE OBJECT IS NOT IN 
LOWER LID, INSPECTUPPER 
LID. GRASP EYELASHES WITH 
THUMB AND INDEX FINGER 
AND PLACE MATCH STICK 
OR SMALL TWIG OVER LID. 



PULL LID UP AND OVER STICK. 
EXAMINE INSIDE OF LID WHILE 
THE CASUALTY LOOKS DOWN. 
GENTLY REMOVE PARTICLE WITH 
CLEAN CORNER OF HANDKERCHIEF 



Figure 9-1 . Removing a foreign particle from the eye. 

the thront. There is preat dan^r of respiratory obstruction if the 
object cannot be removed, so get medical aid as quickly as possible. 
An alternate method, the Heimhch hug, is described in paragraph 
9-14. 

9-5. Foot Trouble 

Foot trouble can be avoided by taking proper care of the feet as 
discussed in FM 21-10. Should you develop foot trouble such as a 
callus or corn, a blister, or athlete^s foot, get medical aid. Do not 



B6 



cut a callus or com, as this can cause a serious infection. If the 
bhster develops, seek medical aid. Meanwhile, thoroughly wash 
the blister with soap and water and apply a first aid dressing. 

9-6. Snake and Spider Bites and Scorpion Stings 

Bites from snakes, black widow spiders, and brown recluse spidei's 
and stings from scorpions can be prevented by following tlie 
measures discussed in FM 21-10. Should a soldier receive a bite or 
sting fiom one of these venomous animals, the first aid measures 
outlined below should be followed: 

a. Snake Bite. 

(1) Keassure the soldier and keeji him quiet. Within practical 
limits achieve immediate, absolute immobilization of the affected 
partjn a position below the level of the heart. 

(2) If the bite is on an extremity, place an improvised lightly 
constricting band (shoestring, bootlace, handkerchief, strip of 
cloth) between the bite site and the heait at a point 2 to 4 inches 
above the site of the bite. If swelling progresses up the arm or leg, 
reapply this constricting band ahead of the swelling. The constrict- 
ing band should be applied tightly enough to stop the flow of blood 
in the vessels near the skin surface but not tiglitly enough to stop 
the arteiial flow or the pulse. You should be able to inseit a finger 
between the band and the limb. As soon as the veins under the 
skin stand out prominently, the appropriate flow of blood has been 
projierly halted. Also, the presence of a pulse in the part below the 
band indicates the continuance of arterial flow. The pidse can be 
checked by placing two fingers, not the thumb, over the pressure 
point in the wrist or ankle as appropriate (fig 4-2). Do not attempt 
to cut ojjen the bite or suck out the venom. 

(3) Remove all watches, rings, and bracelets from the bitten 
limb. Tissue sweUing makes their removal painfid and difficult at a 
later time. 

(4) Continue to reassure the soldier but do not give him alcohol 
or medication. 

(f>) Since medical aid is urgent in all cases of poisonous snake 
bite, send someone to summon assistance. If a litter or a vehicle is 
available, txanspoil the soldier to the nearest medical treatment 
facility at once. The snake should be killed (if possible, without 
damaging its head) and taken along so that it can be identic jd to 
aid medical personnel in determining the proj^r antivenom serum 
for the soldier. 

(6) Observe him closely for signs of difficult breathing, since 

87 



some types of snake poison affect the breathing mechanism. 
Should breathing stop, initiate artificial respiration (chap 3) at 

once. 

Note: If ice or some type of freezp-pack is available, it shouM be placed around 
the reRion of tbe body where the bite occurred to help prevent the venom from 
spreading. 

b. Black Widow or Brown Recluse Spider Bite. 

(1) Keep the soldier as quiet as possible. 

(2) If ice or some type of freeze-pack is available, place an ice 
pack around the region of the body where the bite occurred to 
keep the venom from spreading. 

(3) Get the soldier to the nearest medical treatment facility 
without delay. 

c. Scorj>ion Sting. In most areas of the world, scorpions are not 
highly dangerous; however, in South America certain types can 
cause deatli if proper treatment is not administered. 

(1) For an ordinary scorpion sting, put a piece of ice or some 
type of freeze-pack, if available, on the site of the sting as soon as 
possible. This may decrease the absorption of the venom by the 
body. Baking soda applied as a paste to the site of the bite will 
often relieve the pain. 

(2) If the site of the sting is on the face, neck, or genital organs 
or if the sting is from a scorpion in the area of the world 
mentioned above, keep the soldier as quiet as possible and get him 
to the nearest medical treatment facility without delay, 

9-7. Skin Eruptions from Poisonous Plants 

The sap or juice of certain plants will cause skin eruptions on some 
persons. The most common plants are poison ivy, poison oak, and 
poison sumac. Skin eruptions from these plants can be prevented 
by learning how to identify the plants and by taking the proper 
control measures (FM 21-10). Should you develop a skin eruption 
several days after possible exposure to any of these plants, avoid 
scratching it and seek medical aid. The skin eruption first appears 
as redness and swelling accompanied by severe burning and 
itching; blisters appear later. 

9-8. Conditions Caused by Extreme Heat 

Conditions caused by extreme heat are heat exhaustion, heat- 
stroke, and heat cramps, as well as sunburn and prickly heat. The 
irerson who has suffered heat injury should be taken immediately 

B8 



to the nearest medical treatment facility. Heat injuries can cause 

permanent damage. These conditions can be prevented by proper 

accUmatization to heat, adequate consumption of water and salt, 

and consistent practice of the prescribed preventive measures (FM 
21-10), 

a. Heat Exhaustion. This condition is caused by excessive loss of 
water and salt from the body. The symptoms of heat exhaustion 
are headache, excessive sweating, weakness, dizziness, nausea, 
and muacle cramps. Also, the skin is pale, cool, moist, and clammy. 
Heat exhaustion may come on gradually or suddenly. A victim of 
heat exhaustion should be given first aid as follows: 

(1) Lay the soldier in a cool shaded area and loosen his 
clothing. 

(2) Hhe is conscious, have him drink three to five canteens full 
of cool salt water during a period of 12 hours. Prepare the salt 
water by dissolving two crushed salt tablets or one-fourth tea- 
spoonful of table salt in a canteen (quart) of cool water. 

6. Heatstroke, Prolonged exposure to high temperature may 
cause heatstroke, which is sometimes referred to as "sunstroke." 
Tlie first sign of heatstroke may be stoppage of sweating, which 
causes the skin to feel hot and dry. Collapse and unconsciousness 

may come suddenly or may be preceded by headache, dizziness, 
fast pulse, nausea, vomiting, and mental confusion. It is necessary 
to work fast to save the life of a soldier with heatstroke, since the 
heat regulators of the body have been damaged and the tempera- 
ture may rise as high as 108^ F. The following first aid measures 
should be administered promptly: 

(1) Immeree the soldier in the coldest water available. If ice is 
available, add it to the water. 

(2) If a cold water bath is not possible, get the soldier into the 
shade, remove his clothing, and keep his entire body wet by 
pouring water over him. Cool him further by continuously fanning 
his wet body. 

(3) Transport him to the nearest medical treatment facihty at 
once and continue to cool his body on the way. 

(4) When the soldier becomes conscious, give him cool salt 
water to drink (a(2) above). 

c. Heat Cramps. Heat cramps are painful spasms of the muscles, 
usually those of the legs, arms, and abdomen. They may be either 
mild or severe. Cramps are due directly to loss of salt from the 
body. Give a soldier with heat cramps large amounts of cool salt 

89 



water to drink (n(2) above). If he has severe heat cramps, it may be 
necessary to send liim to a medical treatment facility. 



9-9. Conditions Caused by Cold 

Conditions caused by cold are trench foot, immersion foot, frost- 
bite, and snow blindness. These conditions can be prevented by 
practicing the prescribed preventive measures (FM 21-10). 

a. Trench Foot. Trench foot is an injury which results from fairly 
long exposure of the feet to wet conditions, generally at tempera- 
tures from approximately freezing to SOP F. If the feet are also 
inactive, the possibility of developing trench foot is even greater. 
Trench foot can be very serious; it can lead to loss of toes or parts 
of the feet. Usually a symptom of trench foot is numbness. There 
may be a tinghng or aching sensation or cramping pain. If 
exposure of the feet has been prolonged and severe, the feet may 
swell so much that pressure closes the blood vessels and cuts off 
the circulation. Should. you develop trench foot, dry your feet 
thoroughly and get to a medical treatment facility by the fastest 
means possible. If transportation is available, avoid walking. 

&. Immersion Foot. Immersion foot is similar to trench foot, 
except in the manner in which it is caused. It results from 
immersion of the feet in water or constant wetness of the feet for a 
prolonged period, usually in excess of 12 hours. Immersion foot will 
develop more rapidly if the water is below b<f F. It can occur, 
however, when the feet are exposed even to warm water for a 
period exceeding 24 hours. In immersion foot the soles of the feet 
become wrinkled and white; standing or walking becomes ex- 
tremely painful. Other portions of the body may be similarly 
affected. Should you develop immersion foot, dry your feet thor- 
oughly and get to a medical treatment facility by the fastest 
means possible. If transportation is available, avoid walking, 

c. Frostbite. Frostbite is the injury of tissue from exposure to 
cold. The body parts most easily frostbitten are the cheeks, nose, 
ears, chin, forehead, wrists, hands, and feet. Frostbite may involve 
only the skin, or it may extend to a depth below the skin. Deep 
frostbite, which is much more serious requires different first aid to 
avoid or minimize the loss of the parts of the fingers, toes, hands, 
or feet. Frostbitten skin is white, stiff, and numb rather than 
painful. For this reason, soldiers must watch one another's face 
and hands for signs of frostbite. If the part has been numb for only 
a short time, the frostbite probably involves only the skin; other- 

90 



wise, assume it to be deep. The following measures should be 
taken for frostbite: 

(1) First aid measures for frostbite involving only the skin. 

Note: Do not rub the frostbitten parts with snow nor apply cold water soak.s. 
Neither should you warm or rewarm the party by auch measures asi massage 
and exposure to open fire. 

(a) Parts of the face. Cover the frostbitten part with your 
warm hands until pain returns. 

{b) Hands. Place the bare hands next to the skin in the 
opposite armpits. 

(c) Feet. In the most sheltered area available, place the bare 
feet under the clothing and against the abdomen of another 
soldier, 

(2) Measures to take when deep frostbite occurs. 

(a) Get to a medical treatment facility by the fastest means 
possible. 

(b) Protect the frostbitten part from additional injury, but do 
not attempt to treat it or thaw it in any way. Thawing in the field 
increases the possibilities of infection, further damage, and gan- 
giene. There is less danger of walking on your feet while they are 
frozen than after they have been thawed. Thawing may occur 
s(X)ntaneously during transportation to tlie medical facility; but 
this cannot be avoided, since the body in general must be kept 
warm. 

d. Snow Blindness. Snow blindness is the effect which glare from 
an icefield or snow field has on the eyes. This condition can occur 
even in cloudy weather. In fact, it is more likely to occur in hazy, 
cloudy weather than when the sun is shining. The early stages of 
snow blindness can be recognized by the scratchy feeling in the 
eyes when the eyelids are closed. Should a pei'son develop snow- 
blindness, his eyes should be covered with a dark c'-^th to shut out 
all light. Then he should be taken to a medical treatment facility 
at once. 

9-10. Carbon Monoxide (CO) Poisoning 

a. Carbon monoxide poisoning can be severe, prolonged, and 
sometimes fatal. It results from inhaling carbon monoxide, which 
is a colorless, tasteless, and practically odorless gas produced by 
the incomplete combustion of coal, oil, and other fuels used in such 
equipment as motor vehicles, field ranges, and lighting and heat- 
ing devices. This carbon monoxide destroys the ability of the red 
blood ceils to carry the needed oxygen to the body tissues. Carbon 

91 



monoxide poisoninp: is nsimHy the result of faulty equipment, 
improper use of equipment, or inadequate ventilation. It can be 
prevented by following the precautionary measures discussed in 
FM 21-10. 

b. The symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning come on rapidly 
find in quick succession. Dizziness, headache, noises in the ears, 
and throbbing in the temjjles are quickly followed by a feeling of 
sleepiness and weakness. Vomiting and convulsions may occur, 
followed by unconsciousness and death. The skin and lips are often 
bright red. TJie individual who is becoming poisoned may realize 
wliat is taking place, but lie may not have enougJi strength left to 
get into the fresh air. Under circumstances in which there is 
muscular exertion or where there are extremes of temperature or 
humidity, the effects of poisoning act more rapidly. 

c. The following first aid measures should be taken for a person 
who is overcome by carbon monoxide: 

(1) Move the soldier into fresh air immediately and administer 
artificial respiration (chap 3). }i is safe to administer mouth-to- 
mouth respiration to a carbon monoxide victim, 

<2) Keep the soldier quiet and transport him to a medical 
treatment facility. 

9-1 1 . Drowning 

Drowning occurs when air is shut off from the airway by water or 
any other flui<l, causing spasm of the vocal cords and blockage of 
the airway. Many soldiers who appear hfeless may recover if 
artificial respiration (chap 3) is performed promptly and efficiently. 
Speed is essential. Every moment of delay decreases the soldier's 
chance of survival- It is fi^equently possible to start the mouth-to- 
mouth method of artificial respiration (para 3-4) before the soldier 
is brought ashore. As soon as his head is clear of the water and his 
mouth is within reach of your mouth, start artificial respiration. If 
other rescuers -an help carry the soldier ashore^ do not make a 
break in the artificial respiration. Once the soldier is ashore, do not 
waste valuable seconds to turn him in an attempt to drain water 
from his hmgs; but continue the artificial respiration. 

9-12. Electric Shock 

Electric shock accidents frequently result from contact with a 
"live" wire and occasionally occur when a person is struck by 
lightning. If a person has come in contact with an electric current, 
take the following steps: 

92 



a. Turn off the switch if it is nearby, but do not waste time 
looking for it. Instead use a di-y wooden pole, dry clothing, dry 
rope, or some other material which will not conduct electricity to 
remove the person from the wire. If a pole is not handy, simply 
drag the soldier off the wire by means of a loop of dry rope or cloth 
(fig 9-2). Do not touch the wire or the soldier with your bare hands 
or you will also get a shock. 

b. Administer artificial respiration (chap 3) immediately after 
freeing the person from the wire, as electric shock causes breath- 
ing to cease. Also check the soldier's ptdse, since electric sliock 
may also cause his heart to stop. If you do not feel a pulse 
immediately, administer closed-chest heai-t massage (chap 3) with 
the artificial respiration. 



9-13. Unconsciousness or Delirium 

It is often impossible to find the cause of unconsciousness. Bleed 
ing, heatstroke, or head injury may be the cause. 




DO NOT TOUCH 
SOURCE Of 

ELECTRICITY 



Figure 9-2. Rescuing a Boldier who has had an electric shock. 



93 



a. If a soldier is unconscious, apply the lifesavin^ measures A, B, 
C, and D (chap 3-0) as appropriate. If he has a head injury or a 
heatstroke, apply the special measures discussed in paragraph 7-5 
or 9-^. If the sohher remains unconscious after first aid measures 
have been applied, be sure to place him on his side or on his 
abdomen with his head turned to one side to prevent his choking 
or vomitus, blood, or other fluids (c, fig 5-1). Do not give an 
unconscious soldier liquid. 

b. If a soldier has merely fainted, he will regain consciousness 
withm a few minutes. If an ammonia inhalant solution (app B) is 
available, break the ampul and place it near his nose several times 
for a few seconds each time. If he is in a sitting position, lay him 
down gently. Loosen his clothing, apply a cloth which has been wet 
with cool water to his face, and let him lie quietly. Any time that a 
pei-son is about to faint while sitting up, lower his head between 
his knees so that blood rfiay How to his head. Hold him so that he 
does not faH and injure himself. 

c. Delirium is a condition of brain. damage which stops short of 
unconsciousness. It may arise because of high fever (malaria), 
head injury, head infections (encephalitis), pneumonia, chest 
wounds, severe burns with fluid loss, severe pain, poisoning by 
chemical agents, drug intoxication (amphetamines, inhaling motor 
fuels, glue-sniffing, impure LSD, atropine), drug withdrawal (alco- 
hol, barbiturates), and numerous other medical conditions. The 
dehriouK soldier often becomes the unconscious soldier. 

(1) The delirious soldier is periodically confused as to where he 
IS, who he is, what day it is, and what he is supposed to be doing. 
His memory for what happened only 2 minutes before is poor. He 
may be extremely restless, anxious, and panicky; or he may be 
more quiet and withdrawn than usual. If he is restless, he may 
hallucinate or believe others will harm him. His speech may be 
slurred, and his thoughts are difficult to understand. 

(2) The delirious soldier must be approached in a calm, confi- 
dent manner. If you show fear, he will be convinced that danger 
surrounds him and may strike out. Explain to the soldier who he 
IS, where he is, and what has happened to him. Keep his attention 
focused on you, away from his own imagination. With the help of 
friends, get him to a quiet place; and if he has a weapon, disarm 
him. A buddy must stay with him until he is evacuated, as he 

cannot be trusted to think clearly and he may injure himself or 
others. 

(3) Delirium, like unconsciousness, is a medical signal that the 
bram is not working well. Whereas psychological first aid (chap 12), 

94 



which consists of getting through, ventilation, and organized 
activity, are appropriate for the psychological soldier, delirium 
requires prompt medical or surgical attention. 

9-14. Obstruction of Trachea 

The pei-son vt'hose trachea is obstructed by food cannot breathe, 
cannot speak, turns cyanotic, and collajises. He has only four 
minutes to live unless you save him by applying the Heimlich hug: 

a. If the victim is standing or sitting (fig &-3): 

(1) Stand behind him and wrap your arms around his waist. 

(2) Make a fist with one hand and place It against the victim's 
abdomen sUghtly above the navel and Mow the rib cage; then 
grasp the wrist of this hand with your other hand. 

(3) Pi-ess your fist forcefully into the victim's abdomen with a 
quick upward thrust; causing a sharp exhalation of air to blow the 
food out the airway. 

(4) Repeat several times, if necessary. 

b. If the victim is lying on his back (fig 9-4): 

(1) Facing him, kneel astride his hips. 

(2) With one of your hands on top of the other, place the heel of 
your bottom hand on the victim's abdomen slightly above the 
navel and below the rib cage. 

(3) Press forcefully with the heel of your hand into the victim's 
abdomen with a quick upward thiust. 

(4) Repeat several times, if necessary. 

c. If the victim is lying face down, turn him over and proceed as 
above. 



95 



-rr -----i^M - S^^Ttt'rf j--r^t c - ^ ^---J -+"l;«-J-XII 




Figure 9-J. Doing the Heimlich hug with victim standing or sitting 




Figure 9^. Doing the Heimlich hug with victim lying on his back. 



96 



CHAPTER 10 
TRANSPORTING THE WOUNDED SOLDIER 



Section I. INTRODUCTION 



lQ-1. General 



a, Trunaportution of the aick and woiiruied ia the responsibility of 
medical personnel who have been provided special training and 
equipment. Therefore, unless a good reason for your transporting 
a wounded aoldier uritieH, wait for aonie means (if medical evacna- 
lion to be piovided. When the situation is urgent anti you are 
unable to obtain medical assistance or know that no medical 
evacuation facilities are available, you will have to transport the 
wounded soldier. For this reason, you must know how to transport 
him without increasing the seriousness of his condition. 

b. Transporting a wounded soldier by litter (FM 8-35) is safer 
and more comfortable for him than it is by manual means. It is 
also easier for you. Manual transportation, however, may be the 
only feasible method because of the terrain or the combat situa- 
tion; or it may be necessary to save a life. In these situations, the 
solilier should be transferred to a litter as soon as one can he made 
available or improvised (para 10-6). 



10-2. Handling the Wounded Soldier 

Although the wounded soldier's life may have been saved through 
the application of appropriate first aid measures (chap 2-9), it can 
he lost through careless or rough handling in transi>orting him. 
Therefore, before you attempt to move the wounded soldier, you 
must evaluate the type and extent of his injury and insure thar 
dressings over wounds are adequately reinforced and that frac- 
tured bones are properly immobiUzed and supported to preven' 
tliem from cutting through muscle, blood vessels, an<l skin. Based 

97 



upon your evaluation of the type and extent of the soldier's injury 
and your knowledge of the various manual carries (para 1(^-3 — 10- 
5), you are to select the best possible method of manual transpor- 
tation. If the wounded soldier is conscious, he should be told how 
he is to be transported. This will help allay his fear of movement 
and prain his cooperation. 



Section II. MANUAL CARRIER 



10-3. General 



a. This section contains illustrations of manual carries witli 
explanation of basic step-by-step doctrine included in the illustra- 
tions. In the application of the doctrine, certain flexibility is 
permitted. 

6. Manual carries (fiprs 1(>-1 tluough 10-21) are accomi)lished by 

one bearer or by two bearers. Two-man carries are used whenever 

possible. They provide more comfort to the injured soldier, are less 

likely to aggravate injuries, and are also less tiring for the bearers, 

thus enabhng them to carry the soldier farther. The distance 

which the injured soldier can be transported by manual carries 

depends upon many factors, including the strength and endurance 

of the bearer(s), the weight of the soldier, the nature of the 

Soulier's injury, and t!.:^ obstacles encountered by the beareKs). 

Some carries cause less fatigue to the bearer(s) than others. Also, 

some carries may be inappropriate because of the nature of tlie 

soldier's injury. For example, certain carries cannot be used if the 

soldier has a fractured arm, neck, back, hip, thigh, or leg. The 

position in which the injured soldier should be placed for hfting (fig 

10-1) depends upon the particular caiTy to be used. 

10-4. One-Man Carries 

a. Fireman*s Cai-ry, The fii-eman's carry (fig 10-2-10-6) is one of 
the easiest ways for one man to carry another. After an uncon- 
scious or disabled soldier has been properly positioned (a, fig 10-1), 
he is raised from the ground in the first four steps of the carry (fig 
10-2). An alternate method for raising a soldier from the ground is 
illustrated in figure 10-6; however, it should be use<i only when the 
bearer believes it to be safer for the soldier because of the location 
of his wounds. When the alternate method is used, care must be 
taken to prevent the soldier's head from snapping back and 
causing a neck injury. The steps for raising an injured soldier from 
the ground for the fireman's carry are also used in other one-man 
carries. 

98 



6. Supporting Carry. In the supporting carry (fig 10-7), the 
injured soldier must be able to walk or at least hop on one leg, 
using the bearer as a crutch. This carry can be used to transport a 
soldier as far as he is able to walk or hop. 

c. Amis Carry, The arms carry (fig lOS) is useful in carrying an 
injureil soldier for a short distance and for placing him on a litter. 

d. Saddleback Ca^-ry. Only a conscious soldier can be transported 
by the saddleback carry (fig 10-9), as he must be able to hold onto 
the beaier's neck. 

e. Pack-Strap Carry. In the pack-strap carry (fig 10-10), tiie 
injure*! soldier's weight rests higli on the bearer's back, making it 
easier for the bearer to carry him a moderate distance. To 
eliminate the possibility of injury to tlie soldier's arms, the bearer 
must hold the soldier's arms in a palms-down position. 

/ Pistol-Belt Carry. The pistol-belt carry (fig 10-11—10-13) is tlie 
best one man carry for a long distance. The injured soldier is 
securely supported by a belt upon the shoulders of the bearer. The 
hands of both the bearer and the soldier are lea free for carrying a 
weapon or equipment, climbing banks, or surmounting other 
obstacles. With the hands free and the soldier secured in place, the 
bearer is also able to creep through shrubs and under low hanging 
branches. 

Q, Pistol-Belt Drafir..The pistol-belt drag (fig 10-14) as well as 
other (h-ags are generally used for short distances. The pistol-belt 
drag is useftil in combat. The bearer and the injured soldier can 
remain closer to the ground in this drag than in any other one. 

k. Neck Drag. The neck drag (fig 10-15) is useful in combat 
because the bearer can transport an injured soldier as he creeps 
behind a low wall or shrubbery, under a vehicle, or through a 
culvejt. If the soldier is unconscious, his head must be protected 
from the ground. 

i. Cradle Drop Drag. The cradle drop drag (fig 10-16) is effective 
in moving an injured soldier down or up stei)s. 

10-5. Two-Man Carries 

a. Two-Man Supporting Carry. The two-man supporting carry 
(fig 10-17) can be used in transporting a soldier who is conscious or 
unconscious. If the soldier is taller than the bearers, it may be 
necessary for the bearers to Ua his legs and let them rest on their 
forearms. 



99 



b, T^ifo-Man Aynis Carry, The two-man arms carry UiS ^^^^> '« 
useful in carrying an injured soldier for a moderate distance and 
for placin,^ him on a litter. To lessen fatiRue, the bearers should 
carry the soldier hi^h and as close to their chests as possible. In 
extreme emer^ncies when there is no time to obtain a board, this 
manual carry is the safest one for transportinp a soldier with a 
back injury. Two additional bearers should be used to keep the 
soldier's head and legs in alignment with his body. 

c. Two-Man Fore-and-Aft Carry. The fore-and-aft carry (fiR 1(>- 
19) is a most useful two-man carry for transporting an injured 
solilier for a lonfr distance. The taller of the two bearers should 
imsition himself at the head of the soldier. By altering this carry so 
that both bearers face the soldier, it is also useful for placmg the 
soldier on a litter: 

d: Four-Hand Seat Carry. Only a conscious soldier can be 
transported with the four-hand seat carry (fig 10-20), as he must 
help support himself by placing his arms around the bearers' 
shoulders. This carry is esi>ecialiy useful in transporting the 
soldier with a head or foot injury for a moderate distance and in 
placing a soldier on a litter. 

e. Two-Hand Seat Carry, The two-hand seat carry (fig 10-21) is 
used in carrying an injured soldier for a short distance and m 
placing him on a litter. 



10-6. Improvised Litters 

a. A litter can be improvised from many different things. Most 
flat-surface objects of suitable size can be used as bttei-s. Such 
objects include boards, doors, window shutters, benches, ladders, 
cots, and poles tied together. If possible, these objects should be 
padded. 

b. Satisfactory litters can also be made by securing poles inside 
such items as blankets, shelter halves, tarpaulins, jackets, shirts, 
sacks, bags, bedticks, and mattress covers. Poles can be improvised 
from sti-ong branches, rifles, tent supports, skis, and other items. 

Cavtion: If rifles are used, make certain Ihey are unloaded. 

c. If no poles can be obtained, a large item such as a blanket can 
be rolled from both sides toward the center; then the rolls can be 
!ised to obtain a firm grip when carrying the soldier. Several 
methods of improvising litters are illustrated and explained in 
figures 10-22 through 10-24. 

100 



7^ ROLLrNG SOLDIEK KftOH 
HIS BACK TO ABDOMEN 




KNEEL AT THE SOLDIER'S UNINJURED SIDE. ?LACE HrSARHS ARnuF uic 
HEAD AND CflOSS HJS ANKLE FARTHER FROM YOU OVEA THE ONE aOSER lo 
YOU. PLACE ONE OF YOUR HANDS ON THE SMOULDER FlRTHEfiFSoSYnu 
AND YOUR OTHER HAND JN THE AREA OF HIS HJP Oft TmaS THEN GENT' Y 
ROLL HIH TOWARD YOU ONTO HIS ABDOHEN. " '^ 

"^ ROLLJNC SOLDIER FROM 
HJS ABDOMEN TO BACK 




KNEEL AT THE SOLDIER'S UNJNJURED SIDE. PLACE HIS ARMS AflOUF hik 



Fioure 10-1. Positioning the soUlier to be lifted. 



■"^n^ 






!«.* 



- '^ li-fc*^-^^ T»--"'--P^rrf tl h-* -r* r^--l -"l ^ ' 




STEP ONE: AFTETt ROH.ING THE 
SOLDIER ONTO HIS ABDOHEH, 
STRADDLE HIH; THEN EXTEND 
YOUR HftNOS UNDER HIS CHEST 
AND LOCK THEtt TOGETHER. 





STEP TWO: LIFT THE SOLDIER 
TO HIS KNEES AS YOU HOVE 
BACKWARD. 



ALTERNATE LOCK 



STEP FOUTl: WALK FORWARD, 
BRINGING THE SOLDIER TO 
A STANDING POSITION BUT 
TILTED SLIGHTLY BACKWARD 
TO PREVENT HIS KNEES FROM 
BUCKLING. 



STEP THREE: CONTINUE TO HOVE 
BACKWARD, THUS STRAIGHTENING 
THE SOLDIER'S LEGS AMD LOCKING 
HIS KNEES. 




Fignre 10-ff. Fireman-B ca.ry fstepa one, two, three, a^^d four) 



102 





STEP FIV£: AS YOU MAINTAIN CONSTANT SUPPORT OF THE SOLDtER WITH 
YOUR LEFT ARM, FREE YOUR ftJGHT AflM» QUICKLY GRASP HJS RrGHT WRIST, 
AND RAISE HIS ARK HIGH. INSTANTLY PASS YOUR HEAD UNDER HIS RAISED 
ARM, RELEASING IT AS YOU PASS UNDER JT. MOVE SWIFTLY TO fACE THE 
SOLDIER AND SECURE YOUR ARMS AROUNO HIS WAIST. IMMEDIATELY PLACE 
YOUR RIGHT TOE BETWEEN HJS FEET A? J SPREAD THEM 6 TO 8 INCHES APART 



Figure i0~3. Fireman's carry (step five). 



103 



^* 



'*1*LVi.^t'', 




STEP SIX: WITH YOUR LEFT 
HAND, GRASP THE SOLDIER'S 
RIGHT WRIST AND T.MSE HIS 
ARM OVER YOUft HEAD- 




STEP SEVEH: BEND AT THE WAIST 
AND KHEES; THEH PULL THE SOLDIER'S 
ARM OVER AND DOWN YOUR LEFT 
SHOULDER, THUS BRINGING HIS BODY 
ACROSS YOUR SHOULDERS. AT THE SAME 
TIME, PASS YOUR RIGHT ARM BETWEEN 
HIS LEGS. 



Figure 10^. Ftreman^a carry (steps six and seven). 



104 





SUP ErCHT: PLACE THE SOLDIER'S 
RIGHT WP.IST IN YOUR RIGHT HAND 
AND PLACE YOUR LEFT HAND OH YOUR 
LEFT KNEE FOR SUPPORT IH RISING. 



STEP NINE: RISE WITH THE 
SOLDIER CORRECTLY POSITIONED 
YOUR LEFT HAND JS FREE FOR 
USE AS NEEDEO. 



Figure J0~5. Fireman's carry (stepu eight ami nine). 



105 




STEP ONE- KNEEt ON ONE KNEE AT THE SOLDIER'S HEAD. FACIHfi HIS "ET; THEN 
EXTEND YOUR HANDS UNDER HIS ARHPITS, DOWN HIS SIDES. AND ACROSS HIS BACK. 





STEP TWO: AS YOU RISE. L»FT 
THE SOLDIER TO HIS KNEES; THEN 
SECURE A LOWER HOLD AND RAISE 
HIM TO A STANDING POSITION 
WITH HIS KNEES LOCKEO. 



STEP THREE: SECURE YOUR ARMS 
AHOUNO THE SOLDIER'S WAIST, 
WITH HIS BODY TILTED SLIGHTLY 
BACKWARD TO PREVENT HIS KHEES 
FROM BUCKLING. PLACE YOUR 

RIGHT TOE BEIWEEH HIS FEET 
AND SPREAD THEM 6 TO 8 

INCHES APART, 



figure 10-6. Fireman'it carry (alternate method for lijlinff an injured soldier to a 

standing position}. 



106 




STEP OWE: RAISE THE SOLDUR FROH GROUND AS IN FIREHAN'S CARRY. 

STEP TWO: WITH YOUR LEFT (RIGHT) HAND GRASP THE SOLDIER'S LEFT 
(RIGHT) WRIST AND DRAW HIS ARH AROUND YOUR NECK. PIACE YOUR 
RIGHT (LEFT) ARH AROUMO HIS WAIST. 

(THE SOLDIER IS THUS ABLE TO WALK, USING YOU AS A CRUTCH.) 

Figure 10-7. Supyiorting curry. 



107 



fcT *i m - - -fc^-^ 




LIFT SOLDIER OFF GROUND AS IN FIREMAN'S 
CARRY. CARRY SOLDIER HIGH TO LESSEN 
FATIGUE- 

Figure 10-8. Arms carry. 



108 




STEP ONE: RAISE SOLDIER TO UPRIGHT POSITION AS IN FIREMAN'S CARRY. 

STEP TWO: SUPPORT SOLDIER BY PLACING AH ARM AROUMD HIS WAIST AND 
MOVE IH PROMT OF HIH. 

STEP THREE: HAVE SOLDIER ENCIRCLE HIS ARMS AROUND YOUR NECK. 

STEP FOUfl: STOOP. RAISE HIM UPON YOUR BACK, AND CLASP HANDS 
BEN£ATH HIS THIGHS. 

Figure 10-9. Saddleback carry. 



109 





STEP ONE: LIFT SOLDIER FROM GROUND AS IN FIREMAN'S CARRY. 

STEP TWO- SUPPORTING THE SOLDIER WITH YOUR ARM /^ROUNO "'^' 
GRASP HIS WRIST CLOSEST TO YOU AND PLACE HtS ARM OVER YOUR 
SSd AN^ ACnisS YOUR SHOULDER, HOVE IN F«««T Of H.H WHILE 
SUPPORTING HIS WEIGHT AGAINST YOUR BACK. GRASP HIS OTHER 
WRIST, AND PLACE THIS ARM OVER YOUR SHOULDER. 

STEP THREE- BEND fORWARD AND HOIST HIM AS HIGH ON YOUR BACK 
AS POSSIBLE SO THAT ALL HIS WEIGHT IS RESTING ON YOUR BACK. 

Figure 10-10. Pack-strap carry. 



110 




STEP ONE: LINK TOGETHER TVO PISTOL BELTS TO FORH A SLING. 
(IF PISTOL BELTS ftRE HOT AVAILABLE FOR USE, OTHER JTEMS, SUCH AS 
ONE ftlfLE SLING, (WO CRAVAT BANDAGES. TWO UTTER STRAPS, OR AMY 
SUITABLE HATERIAL WHICH WILL WOT CWT OR BIND TH£ SOLOJEft. MAY 
BE USED.) PLACE THE SLING UNDER THE SOLDIER'S THIGHS AND LOWER 
BACK SO THAT A LOOP EXTENDS FROH EACH SIOE. 




STEP TWO: LIE BETWEEN THE SOLDIER'S OUTSTRETCHED LEGS. 
THRUST yOUR ARHS THROUGH THE LOOPS, GRASP SOLDIER'S HAHD 
AND TROUSER LEG ON HIS INJURED S4DE. 

Figure 10-11. Pistol-bell carry (atepit one and two). 



Ill 



STEP THREE: ROLL TOWARD THE SOLOfER'S UMINJURED SIDE ONTO YOUR ABOOHEH, 
BRIMGtNG THH SOLDIER ONTO VOUR BACK. ADJUST SLING AS NECESSARY. 




STEP FOUR: RJSE TO A KNEELINiJ POSITION. THE BELT WILL HOLD THE SOLDIER 
IN PLACE. 

Ficure JO-IS. Pintol-beit carry (steps three avd four). 



112 




STtP FIVE: PLACE ONE HA«D OM YOUR KH£E FOR 
SUPPORT AND RJSE TO Mi UPRKHT POSITION. THE 

SOLD I Eft IS MOW SUPPORTED ON VOUR SHOULDERS. 




STEP SIX: CARfiV THE SOLDIER WITH VOUR HAHDS 
FREE FOR USE IN f IRIHG RIFLE. CLJHBING BANKS, OR 
SURMOUNTING OBSTACLES. 



Figure 10-13. Pivtolbelt carty (steps five and six). 



113 



r,:i\: 



■ii^'S^'s^M^'^. 



l^-frJ ^-iKin, 



L^r^.^ 




STEP ONE: EXTEND TVO PISTOL-BELTS OR SIMILAR OBJECTS TO THEIR FtJl-L LENGTH 
AMD JOIN THEH TOGETHER TO HAKE A CONTINUOUS LOOP, 

STEP TWO: ROLL THE SOLDIER ON HIS BACK. 

STEP THREE* PASS THE LOOP OVER THE SOLDIER'S HEAD AND POSITION IT ACROSS 
HIS CHEST AND UNDER HIS ARMPITS; THEN CROSS THE REHAIHING PORTION OF THE 

LOOP, THUS FORMING A FIGURE EICNT. 

1 

STEP FOUR: LIE ON YOUR SIDE WITH YOUR BACK AWAY FROM THE SOLDIER. RESTING 
ON YOUR RIGHT ELBOW. 

STEP FIVE- SLIP THE LOOP OVER YOUR RIGHT ARH AND SHOULDER AND TURN ONTO 
YOUR ABDOMEN^ THUS ENABLING YOU TO DRAG THE SOLDIER AS YOU CRAWL. 

Figure 10-H. Pisiol-belt drag , 




STEP ONE: TIE SOLDIER'S HANDS TOGETHER AND LOOP THEH AROUND YOUR HECK 
STEP TWO: CRAWL, DRAGGING SOLDIER WITH YOU. 

Figure 10-15. Neck drag. 



114 



STEP OHE: WITH THE SOLDIER LYING ON HIS BACK, THE BEARER KHEEiS AT 
HIS H£AD, THE BEARER THEN SLIDES 
HIS HANDS, WITH PALHS UP, UNDER 
JHE SOLDIER'S SHOULOEftS AND GETS 
A FIRM HOLD UNDER HIS ARHPITS. 




STEP TWO; THE BEARER PAflTIALLY RJSES, 
SOLDIER'S HEAD ON ONE OF HJS FOREARMS. 
HAV BRING HIS ELBOWS 
TOGETHER AND L£T THE 
SOLDIER'S HEAD REST ON 
BOTH OF H]5 FOREARHSj 



STEP THREE: WITN THE SOLDIER IN A 
SEHISITTING POSITION, THE BEARER 
RJSES AND DRAGS THE SOLDIER 
BACKWARD . 




STEP FOUR: THE BEARER BACKS DOWN 
THE STEPS, SUPPORTING THE SOLDIER'S 
HEAD AND BODY AND LETTING HIS HIPS 
AND LEGS DROP FROM STEP TO STEP. 



Figure }0-lt!. Cradle drop drag. 



1 15 



~^*»^K.'. 



L^-T"^ "IH . 




ALTERNATE HETHOD 
fOR USE WHEN 
SOLDIER IS TALLER 
THAN BEARERS. 

STEP ONE: TWO BEARERS HELP THE SOLDIER TO HIS FEET AND SUPPORT HIH WITH 
THEIR ARMS AROUHO HIS WAIST. 

STEP TWO: THEY GRASP THE SOLDIER'S WRISTS AND DRAW HIS ARHS AROUND THEIR 
MECKS. 

Figure 10-17. Two-miin^uisportivg ca-ny. 



116 



U£P ONE: TWO BEARERS KNEEL 
AT OHE SIDE OF THE SOLDIER, 
EXTEND HIS ARHS ABOVE HIS 
HEAD, AHO PLACE THEIR ARHS 

BENEATH THE SOLD I EH 'S BACK, 
WAIST, HIPS, AND J(N£ES.. 




STEP TWO: THE BEARERS LIFT THE 
SOLDIER AS THEY RISE TO THEIR KNEES. 



STEP THREE: AS THE BEARERS RISE TO THEIR 
FEET, TMEY TURN THE SOLDIER TOWARD THEIR 
CHESTS. THEV CARRY HIH HIGH TO LESSEN 
FATIGUE. 



Figure 10—18. Two-man artufi carry 



117 



■ *^^. ^m^ ■ 




STEP ONE- ONE BEARER SPREADS THE SOLDIER'S tEGS, KNEELS BETWtEM 
THE LEGS WITH HIS BACK TO THE SOLDIER, AND POSITIONS HIS HMOS 
BEHIHO THE KHEES. THE CTHER BEARER KNEELS AT THE SOLOUR'S HEAD, 
SLIDES HIS HANDS UNDER THE ARMS AND ACROSS THE CHEST. AND LOCKS 
HIS HANDS TOGETHER. 




ALIERNATE POSITION— 
FACIHS SOLDIER 



STEP TWO: THE TWO BEARERS RISE TOGETHER, LIFTING THE SOLDIER 

Figure 10-19. Two-man fore-andafi carry. 



118 




STEP ONE: EACH BEARER GRASPS ONE OF Hrs WRISTS AND ONE 
OF TH£ OTHER BEARER'S WftrSTS. THUS FORHING A PACKSADDLE 




STEP TWO: THE TWO BEARERS LOWER THEMSELVES SUFFrciENTLV FOR 
THE SOLOJER TO SIT OH THE PACKSADOLE: THEN THEY HAVE THE SOLDIER 
PI ACE His ARMS AROUNO THEIR SHOULDERS FOR SUPPORT BEFORE THEY 
RISE TO AN UPRIGHT POSITION. 

Figure 10-20. Fottrhattd seat carry. 



119 




FRONT VIEW 



STEP ONE: WITH SOLDIER LYING ON HIS BACK, 
A BEARER KMEELS OH EACH SIDE OF HIM AT 
SOLOJER'S HIPS. 

STEP TWO: EACH BEftRER PASSES HIS ARMS 
UNDER THE SOLDIER'S TH1CH AND BACK, AND 
GRASPS THE OTHER BEARER'S WRISTS. 

STEP THREE: THE BEARERS RISE, LIFTING 
THE SOLDIER. 




BACK VIEW 



Figure 1 OS] . Two-hand seat carry. 



120 








OPEN THE BLANKET AND LAY ONE POLE 
a I LENGTHWISE ACROSS THE CENTER; THEN 
FOLD THE BLANKET OVER THE POLE. 





PLACE THE SECOND.POLE 
ACROSS THE CENTER OF THE 
FOLDED BLANKET, 





FOLD THE FREE EDGES 
OF THE BLANKET OVER 

THE SECOND POLE- 



Figure 10-22. Litter made with poles ajul blankeL 



121 




BUTTON TWO OR THREE 

SHIRTS OR JACKETS AND 
TURN THEM INSIDE OUT, 
LEAVING SLEEVES INSIDE 




PASS POLES THROUGH 
THE SLEEVES. 



Figure iOSX. LUter mnde with jmlen and jackets. 



122 




POLE AND SACK UTTER 




BLANKET ROLL LITTER 



Figure 10-2A> Litters made by inserting poles through sacks and by roUtiiff 

blanket. 



123 



- "-^-P ^-H ■- ^ - 



Zr r" t - 



CHAPTER 1 1 



FIRST AID IN A TOXIC ENVIRONMENT 



Section I. INTRODUCTION 



1 1—1 . General 



0. Gasoline, chlorine, and pesticides are examples of common 
toxic substances. They may exist in the physical state as a solid, 
liquid, or pras, dependinfc upon temperatui'e and pressure. Gasoline, 
for example, is a vaporizable hquid; chlorine is a ^as; anci DDT, a 
pesticide, is a solid. Some substances are more injurious to the 
body than others when they are inhaled, are eaten, or come in 
contact with body surfaces. Whether they are solids, liquitJs, or 
pases (vapors and aerosols included), the,'^ may irritate, inflame, 
burn, freeze, or destroy tissue such as that associated witli tlie 
respiratory tract or the eyes. They may also be absorbed into the 
bloodstream, thus causing disturbance to any one or several of the 
body's major functions. 

h. You may come in contact with toxic substances in everyday 
activities. Examples are the use of disinfectants and bleach solu- 
tions for cleaning clothes, throup:h accidents in handling chemi- 
cals, or through exjwsure to chemical agents used as a means of 
warfare. Ordinarily, exposure to a toxic substance would be for 
only a period of minutes; however, in warfare any toxic substance 

employed by the enemy would be such that it could persist for 
hours or days. This would produce a toxic environment in which 
you woidd have to live. You must, therefore, be prei>ared to protect 
yourself and others against the injurious effects of these agents 
and to give first aid, when necessary, within this toxic environ- 
ment. 

1 1-2. Protective and First Aid Equipment 

You are issued equipment for protection and first aid treatment in 

124 



a toxic environment (a through d below). You must know how and 
when to use these items. When considered necessary, you will also 
be issued special protective clothing, "dubbing" for boots (vesicant 
agent resistant leather dressing), and other prophylactic and first 
aid dt-ug as required, 

a. Field Protective Mask (Model ABC-Ml 7 or Mt7At). Your field 
protective mask is a rnosC important piece of protective equipment. 
You are given special training in its use and care. (See paragiaph 
7-136(3) for explanation of the drinking tube and the protective 
canteen cap of the M17A1 protective mask.) 

b. M258 Skin Decontaminating Kit This kit includes five gauze 
pads, two wiping sticks, and two large plastic capsules, each 
contained in a gauze bag. It is used to decontaminate the skin. 

c. Nerve Ayttidote Injectors. Each soldier is authorized to cany 
two nerve antidote injectors (ComboPens) to be used in the 
treatment of nerve agent symptoms. 

</. Mm Decontaminatioyi and Reimpregnation Kit. This kit con- 
sists of two bags. In each bag are the following items: 

(1) A <lye capsule for use in revealing the i)resence of li(iui(J 
chemical agents on your clothing and personal equipment. 

(2) Chloramide powder for use in neutralizing the chemical 
agents. 

(3) A cutter to remove the paits of your clothing shown by the 
use of the dye to be contaminated. 



Section 11. CHEMICAL-BIOLOGICAL AGENTS 

1 1-3. General 

a. Chemical agents for warfare uses may be classified according 
to the primary physiological effects they produce, such as nerve, 
blister, blood, choking, and incapacitating agents. Your field pro- 
tective mask gives protection against chemical agents as well as 
biological agents and the breathing in of radioactive particles. 
Previous practice enables you to mask in 9 seconds or less. 

b. Ingesting water or food contaminated with nerve, blister, and 

other cliemical agents and with some biological agents can be 

fatal. Never consume water or food which could have become 

contaminated until it has been tested and foimd safe for consump- 
tion (FM 21-10), 

135 



TK^^-^'^^^A h-^^Tb A4MM V '.»,«^iA*->Ai* F-f^^i n pi r H i %Mm i ■fcilBN^j tfH^ u ^ I^WJ' JJ^ - 



1 1-^. Conditions for Masking Without Order or Alarm 

Once fin Attack witli a chemical or biological aRent is <letecte(i or 
suspected or information is available that such an agent is about 
to be used, you must mask immediately. Under the following 
circumstances, do not wait to receive an order or alarm when — 

a. Your position is hit by — 

(1) Artillery or mortar fire. 

(2) Missiles or rockets. 
(8) Smoke or mists. 

(4) Aerial spray or bombs. 

b. Smoke from an unknown source is present. 

c. A suspicious odor, liquid, or solid is present. 

d. You are entering an area suspected of being contaminated. 

e. You have one or more of the following symptoms: 

(1) An unexplained runny nose. 

(2) A feeling of choking or tightness in the chest or throat. 

(3) Dimming of vision. 

(4) Irritation of the eyes. 

(5) Difficulty in or increased rates of breathing without ob- 
vious reasons, 

1 1-5. First Aid For A Chemical Attack 

a. Step ONE. Stop breathing, put on your mask and clear it, give 
the alarm, and continue the mission. 

Note: Keep your ninsk on until it hns been determined that the area is no 
loiiKpr hn7,iirdouR mid yon nte toUJ to unmnsk. 

6. Step TWO. If symptoms of nerve agent poisoning (para 11-7) 
appear, give yourself a nerve agent antidote (para li-8c). 

Note: Do not inject r nerve aeent antidote until you are sure that it is needed. 

c. Step THREE. If you suspect chemical agent droplets in your 
eyes, accomplish the following actions as rapidly as possible. To be 
effective against mustard agents (para 11-9), they must be accom- 
plished within 2 minutes. 

(1) Unscrew the cap on your canteen. 

(2) Remove your helmet. 

(3) Take and hold a deep breath and raise your mask so that 
your face is uncovere^l 

126 



(4) To flush your right eye, tilt your head back and slightly to 
the right. To flush your left eye, tilt your head back and slightly to 
the left. 

(5) Looking upward, pour water into your eye slowly, if 
possible, so that the water will not run onto your face and clothing. 
If you cannot keep your eye open, pull your eyelids away from 
your eye with uncontaminated fingers. 

(6) Reseat and clear your mask. 

d. Step FOUR. If you suspect that your face is contaminated, 
use the M258 kit as explained in paragraph 11-^. 

e. Step FIVE. As soon as your mission permits, remove any 
liquid contamination from other skin areas (para 11-86). 

/. Step SIX. If nerve agents are used and your mission permits, 

watch for persons who need nerve agent antidotes and artificial 

respiration and administer them respectively (para USc and 1^- 
Sd). 

g. Step SEVEN. When your mission permits, decontaminate 
your personal clothing and equipment, using the bags of ehloram- 
ide powder and cutter from your M13 kit (para ll-2f/). 



Section III. NERVE AGENTS 



11-6. General 



a. Nerve agents may enter the body through the eyes and the 
skm and by breathing and eating. Although the nerve agents can 
be absorbed into the body through unbroken skin, they do not 
produce a localized irritant effect. Smoking is not permitted for at 
least 24 hours after exposure to a nerve agent, since the tars and 
nicotme will increase and prolong the jierve agent effects. 

b. If any of the symptoms of nerve agent poisoning are present, 
administer appropriate first aid (para 1 l-8c). 

11-7. Symptoms of Nerve Agent Poisoning 

a. An unexplained runny nose. 

6. Marked difficulty in breathing with tightness in the chest. 

c. Possibly, blurred or reduced vision, resulting horn pinpointed 
pupils of the eyes. 

Note: [Ipon exposure to vapor or ueroaol, the piipilii of the «yes hetonie 
pinpointed immediiilely; however, if the nerve agent is only absorbed throuifb 



127 



.F^^ 



l-rFVVfM.t'^P^^ ^:f^Vt 



^ r, _ 



the skin or by consuniinp contaminnted food or water, the piiipointinR does not 
occur immediately and may be absent. 

d. Drooling, excessive sweatinp:, nausea, vomiting, cramping, and 
involuntary urination and defecation. 

€. Jerking, twitching, and staggering. 

/. Headache, confusion, drovi^siness, coma, convulsions. 

ff. Stoppage of breathing. 

Note: If a soldier has the symptoms listed in d throiiRh g above, he probably 
will not be able to help himself, since they indicate severe poisoning. 



1 1-8. First Aid for Nerve Agent Poisoning 

a. Protective Mask (para ll-2a and ll-i). 

b. M258 Skin Decoyitaviinating Kit If properly used this kit will 
destroy blister and nerve agents on the skin. 

(1) The kit has a plastic cover with a list of contents printed on 
top. The handle :p held down to the side by a piece of tape. Inside 
the top is a metai cutter or spike. On the side of the plastic case 
are the instructions for using the kit. Inside the kit are/ive gauze 
pads, two wiping sticks, and two large plastic capsules, each 
contained in a ganze hag. The gauze pads are used to soak up 
liquid drops on the skin and to apply decontaniinnnt solutions to 
the skin. The wt])inK sticks are used to remove liquid contamina- 
tion that resists removal with gauze pads, for example, a (hlck- 
ened toxic agent. The plastic capsules, labeled 1 and 2, contain the 
decontaminating solutions. Number 1 is smaller than number 2. 

(2) The key to successful use of the kit is immediate action 
when finding the containination. 

(a) First, put on your protective mask. You may detect 
exposure to a chemical agent through appearance of a strange 
li(iui(l on you or in your area or by appearance of agent symjjtoms. 
Your first action is to jmt on your protective mask. 

{h) Open the M258 kit. Insert the T-shaped handle of the 
cover through the web strap so it will not be lost. 

(c) Soak up any liquid on the skin with one of the gauze 
pads. Discard the pad. 

(d) If you find the agent difficult to remove or thickened, use 
the wiping stick(s) to remove it fram the skin. Discard the wiping 

stick(s). 

(e) Remove capsule 1 and puncture its end, using the spike 

in the cap of the kit. Wet a gauze pad with the solution and apply 
128 



it to all areas of the skin that were contaminated with the agent. 
While -applying the decontaminating sohition, you may hold the 
capsule or replace it in the case as you prefer. Discard the gauze 
pad after use. 

(/) Now strike capsule 2 on a hard surface such as the heel of 
your hoot, weapon, or a rock to break the glass vial inside. Shake 
the capsul about 12 times in order to mix the wet and dry 
components. 

(g) Puncture the end of capsule 2 with the spike of the kit*s 
cover. Wet a piece of gauze and swab the contaminated area 
again. You may hold the capsule or replace it in the kit case as you 
refer. Discard the gauze pad after use. 

ih) If you detect the agent soon enough and perform the 
decontamination properly, yon should suffer no ill effects. If 
blisters develop later, treat them as you would a normal heat 
burn. (Nerve agent symptoms are to be treated with the nerve 
agent antidote (c below).) 

(3) The skin decontaminating kit should be kept with the mask 

by attaching it with the snap clip to the mask carrier D ring oi by 

putting the D ring strap through the hole in the web strap of the 
kit. 



c. Nerve Agent Antidote. The soldier is authorized to carry two 
nerve agent antidote injectors (ComboPens) (fig 11-1). 

(1) Each injector is used as follows: 
(a) PuU out the safety cap. 

(6) Place the needle-end on outer thigh and press until the 
injector functions. The injector should be held firmly against the 
thigh for 10 seconds to allow for complete injection of the antidote. 

(c) Give the first injection at the inset of the symptoms. If 
nerve agent symptoms are still present aaer 5 minutes, give the 
second injection. If symptoms still exist after an additional 5 
minutes, do not use another injector but seek medical attention. 

(2) The injectors will be carried in the top, outside pocket on 
the carrier for the M17 masks. Because the size of the outside 
pocket varies, it may be necessary to carry the injectors in the 
pocket inside and at the rear of the carrier. For personnel issued 
the M24 or M25 series masks, the injectors should be carried in the 
pocket for the M13 kit located inside the carrier. In coUl weatlier 
(45'' or lower) to prevent freezing and for maximum effectiveness, 
the antidote injectors should be carried in a pocket next to the 
body. 

129 




figure 11-1. ComboPen auto-injector, 

d. Maak-to Month Artificial Respiration. Administer artificial 
reKpiration, if needeil. If your mission permits, look around and see 
if anyone tieeds your assistance. If a sokiier's breathinp: lias 
become faint or has stopped, administer artificial respiration. If he 
needs a nerve ap:ent antidote, give it fii-st; then start artificial 
respiration immediately. In a toxic environment a soJdier i.mst be 
^iven artificial respiration by either the mask-to-mouth method or 
the back-pressure arm-lift method, which is an alternate method. 
(The back-pressure method has been discussed in paragraph ^7.) 
The mask-to-mouth method of artificial respiration is a modifica- 
tion of the mouth-to-mouth method (para 3-4). The objective is to 
jjet uncontaminated air into the soldier's limps thioupli the use of 
your M17A1 Field Protective Mask and Ml Resuscitation Tube. 
The mask-to-mouth method is |)erformed as follows: 

(1) Prepare your mask (a, Tip: 11-2) for administering artificial 
respiration: 



130 



(a) Turn the valve handle (b, fig 11-2) to the left, thus 
yourtTeuf ^""^^^^'"^ '"^'^ '''^epieee (inside the mask) between 

yJ^:iJ^^:^' '""^ "'"''''- ""' ^-"^ "-■< - '"<= —' .o.ition if 

11 9. ^,' U«i"g your left hand, raise the voicemitter cover (a, % 
11-2). Tlien w.th your right hand insert the outlet valve of the 
resusctafon tube (c, % 11-2) into the air outlet well, which il 
unde| he vo.cemitter cover. To obtain a tight, leakproof seal, first 
insert the unflanged edge of the air outlet valve (e, fig 11-2) with 

asMrible ""''' ""'' **'''" '""*''' ""^ "''"*''"' "'^"^ '"^'"■'' "^ •'"'•'' 
.hf ■ '1 I", df termine whether or not a leakproof seal has been 

r. fi T ' ^! Tt''"'^ P'""'' '^'^ ''*^"' '^"'^ "'■"^'^ corrugated tube 
(c, tig 11-2) and blow into your breathing tube bitepiece. If the 

corrugated tube does not tend to expand, remove and reinsert the 
outlet valve as explained in (b) above; then check again. 

(2) Raise the soldier's protective mask only enough to expose 
his mouth and nose; then clear his airway (para 3-1). 

(3) Position the soldier on his back, his head in a chin-up 
position and his jaw in a juttlngout position as described for 
mouth-to-mouth (nose) method (para 3-2). 

(4) Insert and secure the mouthpiece of the resuscitation tul« 
(c, hg 11-2) between the soldier's lips and teeth (fig 11-3); 

. .u ^'J- 7" '"^'^'^ ^^^ mouthpiece between :he soldier's lips and 
teeth slide only one-half of it into his mouth at a time. Insert the 
ndented part of the mouthpiece under the upper lip. Insure that 
the edges of the mouthpiece are completely sealed with the 
soldieis lips. 

ib) Secure the mouthpiece in place by forming a seal over 
the soUher s hps with your thuu.b and index finger. Hook the other 

oirposit^r ^^^ ^''^^'^'''^ '^*" ^"^ ^""^^^ *''^ ^^"^ ^" ^ J^'"'*^^- 

(5) Administer artificial respiration (fig 11-3); 

(a) With your free hand, pinch the soldier's nose closed, take 
lhov7) '' ^""^ ^**''^ '"^*' ^'''''' I>reathing tube bitepiece ((1X«) 

(b) Continue blowing while watching for the soldier's chest 
to rise. If his chest does not rise, hold his chin up more forcefidly 
and blow harder. If his chest still does not rise, check all connec- 
tions for leakage of air, 

(6) When the soldier's chest rises, stop blowing and release 



131 



iK^k^fw,-^ M*H nfc^-flT-ti -Mfc m-j*^ 



his nose, thus aUowin^ him to exhale. Be sure to close his nose 
apcam as soon as he exhales. 

id) Continue blowing breaths into the soldier and nllowhip 
him to exhale. The first four breaths should be fu!l and quick to 
provide for rapid reoxysenation of blood. Thereaaer, the t>reaths 
should be blown at a rate of approximately once every 5 seconds. If 
exhalation is noisy, hold the chin up more forcefully or check for 
the presence of secretions in the soldier^s upper airway (para 3- 

4d(2)), 

{€) When the soUHer begins to breathe on his own, adjust 
your breathing to assist him. Blow when he is inhaliuK, not when 

he is exhaling. 

(/) When the soldier continues to breathe regularly, stop 
blowing air into his lungs but leave the resuscitation tube in place, 
thus allowing him to inhale uncontaminated air through your 
mask. Be sure to close his nose when he inhales and open it when 
he exhales. If he does not continue to breathe regularly, resume 
mask-to-mouth resuscitatation. 

(£f) When the soldier is able to breathe without assistance, 
remove the resuscitatation tube from his mouth and quickly 
replace his mask. Be sure that his mask is properly sealed. 
Continue to observe him to insure that he does not stop breathmg 
again as the result of toxic vapor which may have accumulated m 
his mask. 

Note- Nerve a^ent poisoninp tends to constrict the patient's breathing pasF^age 
nnd makes inHation of hi;, lun^s more difficult. You may have to blow harder for 
chest iiifiaiion. 

(6) After completing resuscitation, readjust your mask: 

(a) Release your bite on the breathing tube bitepiece, thus 
allowing it to spring back to its neutral position (b, fig 11-2). 

(b) Disconnect the resuscitation tube from your mask by 
pulling it outward and ui)ward, and replace the voicemitter coven 

(c) Wipe the mouthpiece of the resuscitation tube clean and 
stow it in your carrier. 

(7) Notify medical personnel of the soldier's location in accord- 
ance with the standing operating procedure of the unit. 



132 



VOICEMITTER 



AJR INLET 



DRINKING TUBE 



VOICEMITTER 
COVER 



EYEPIECE 



CANTEEN 
CONNECTOR 

AIR OUTLET 
WELL UNDER 
VOJCEWITTER 
COVER 




UNFLANGED 
EDGE 



AIR OUTLET 
VALVE 



FLANGED 
EDGE 



CORRUGATED 
TUBE 



MOUTHPIECE 



Figure Il~£. MiTAl Field Protective Mask and Ml Resuscitation Tube. 



133 



nr^-""^ t *.tfc i V 



_ * -^IF-fcrr 



THUMB AND INDEX FINGER 
SEALING LIPS; OTHER 
FINGERS SUPPORTING JAW 



EYES OBSERVING RISE 
AND FALL OF CHEST 




FOOT SUPPORTING HEAD 

THUKB AND INDEX FINGER 
SEALING AND RELEASING NOSE 



SHOULDERS RAISED WITH 
PONCHO OR BLANKET AND 
HEAD TILTED BACK IN 
CHIN-UP POSITION 



Figure llS. Maskto-moutk artificial respiration. 



Section IV. OTHER AGENTS 

11-9. Blister Agents 

a General, Blister aRents (vesicants) include mustards and 
arsenicals. Relatively low doses may be serious; they ^an cause 
serious injury to the eyes, the upper respiratory ^''^f ^^"^J';J 
skin !f it is known or suspected that blister agents are being used, 
you should take cover, mask, and use the M258 kit to decontami- 
nate your exposed skin (para U-86). K protective clothing has 
been issued, you should, of course, be wearing it. 

b. Syviptoms of Blister Agent Poisoning, 

(1) Instant eye pain upon contact with lewisite. No pain upon 
contact with n.ustard. 

(2) Inflammation, blisters, and tissue destruction. The loiiRer 
the agent is in contact with the tissue and the larger the area 
affected, Uie more serious the injury will become. 

c. First Aid Measures for BlisUr Agent Poisoning. After you 
have acenti.j>lished the applicable steps outlined in paragraph U-5, 
take the following measures as required. 

134 



(1) If blisters form, cover them with loose sterile dressing and 
secure with bandage. Avoid breaking blisters, if possible. 

(2) If large areas of the body become covered with blisters, 
seek medical treatment. 

(3) If a serious bum results from contact with the agent, seek 
medical treatment. 

11-10. Choking Agents 

Your mask provides you complete protection against choking 
agents such as phosgene and chlorine. You can continue your 
mission unless exposure to a choking agent before putting on your 
mask has been sufficient to cause dificulty in breathing, nausea, 
vomiting, or more than the usual shortness of breath upon 
exertion. If these symptoms occur, loosen your clothing, avoid 
unnecessary exertion, keep warm, and wait for medical aid. 

11-11. Blood Agents 

a. The so-called blood agents consist of the cyanides and arsine. 
Your mask provides you complete protection against these agents. 
You must change the filter elements after each bloou agent attack. 

b. Exposure to the blood agents before masking can cause rapid, 
severe interference with your respiration. If exposure to a cyanide 
blood agent does occur before masking, the first aid measures are 
inhalation of amyl nitrite and administration of artificial respira- 
tion (para ll-Hd). Amyl nitrite ampuls may be issued to you if 
intelligence indicates a blood agent will be used. Rapid action is 
paramount, since a person's respiration is immediately affected 
after exposure to a blood agent. "Buddy help" will probably be 
essential. Crush two ampuls of amyl nitrite and place them within 
the facepiece of the mask. Repeat this procedure at intervals of 4 
minutes, using two ampuls each time, until normal breathing 
returns or until a total of eight ampuls have been used. No more 
should be given, since amyl nitrite is poisonous and a larger dose 
would be harmful. If a person does not respond to this dose, he 
must be treated further by a medical officer. If respirations are 
feeble or have stopped, artificial respiration must be initiated until 
spontaneous breathing occurs. 

11-12. Tear Agents (CS or CN) 

a. Should you be exposed to a tear agent before masking, it can 
cause an incieased flow of tears and intense eye pain. U may 
irritate the upper respiratory tract. If you mask after exposure, be 

135 



-r fc 1^ 



^frr^<-^^-:^»W4.V«(»t»^: t ^.';.■^■.;.-..i.,,A^^^5.^l!,^■|,.^^^^;^.:^^:-, ■.,-.-. 



sure to clear your mask and keep your eyes open as much as 
possible. When you remove your mask after the all-clear signal, 
the recovery from the tear a^ent effects will be spontaneous. 

b. If heavy skin contamination occurs in a hot, humid, close 
environment, blistering: may result unless the apfent is rinsed from 
the skin virith water. If the apent in liquid or solid form has entered 
your eyes, force your eyes open and flush them with water. A one- 
fourth percent solution of sodium sulfite, if available, is more 
effective in dissolvinj^ and neutralizing the irritating agent. 

11—13. Vom:ting Agents 

a. DM (Adamsite), DA, and DC typify this ^oup of agents. Your 
mask provides you protection against them. Exposure to such an 
agent before masking may cause sneezing, nausea, sahvation, and 
vomiting. If excessive salivation or vomiting makes lifting your 
mask necessary, be sure to clear your mask after you reseat it. 
Vigorous activity helps reduce nausea and its duration. 

6. The symptoms reach their climax after B to 10 minutes and 
completely disappear after 1 to 3 hours. First aid consists of 
inhaling chloroform which gives instant relief. Chloroform cap- 
sules (para 11-2) can be crushed in a wad of cotton or a handker- 
chief and pushed inside the mask. Do not smoke for several hours. 
If necessary, rinse your mouth with water but do not swallow it. 
Skin and eyes can be washed with water. Clothing can be brushed. 

11—14, Incapacitating Agents 

Generally speaking, an incapacitating agent is any compound 
which can interfere with the performance of military duties by 
affecting the central nervous system and by producing muscular 
weakness and abnormal behavior. It is likely that such agents will 
be disseminated by smoke-producing munitions or aerosols, thus 
making breathing their means of entry into the body. The use of 
the protective mask is, therefore, essential for protection against 
the agents. 

a. There is no special first aid for the relief of the symptoms of 
incapacitating agents. Supportive first aid and physical restraint 
may be indicated. Weapons and other potentially harmful mate- 
rials should be removed from the possession of individuals who are 
suspected of having these symptoms. This includes cigarettes, 
matches, medications, and small items which might be swallowed 
accidentally. Delirious persons have been known to attempt to eat 
items bearing only a superficial resemblance to food. 

136 



b. Anticholinergic drugs (BZ type) may produce alarming diy- 
ness and coating of the lips and tongiie; liowever, there is usually 
no danger of immediate dehydration. Fluids should be given 
sparingly, if at all, because of the danger of vomiting and because 
of the likelihood of temporary urinary retention due to paralysis of 
bladder muscles. An important medical consideration is the possi- 
bility of heatstroke because of stoppage of sweating. If the envi- 
ronmental temperature is above 78° F, remove excessive clothing 
from the soldier and dampen him to allow evaporative cooling and 
prevent dehydration. If the soldier does not readily improve, apply 
first aid measure for heatstroke (para 9-86) and seek medical 
attention. 



11—15. Screening Smokes 

a. Titanium Tetrachloride (FM) Smoke, This smoke is relatively 
nontoxic, but the liquid burns the skin hke a strong acid. The 
smoke is irritating to the nose and throat but only mildly so at the 
concentration usually found in a smoke cloud. The protective mask 
should be worn in heavy concentrations of FM. Flush any liquid 
FM from the skin with water. 

b. Sulfur Trioxide-Chlorosulfonic Acid Solution (FS) Smoke. 
Smoke of this solution causes a prickling sensation on the skin 
because of the minute acid particles of which it is composed. 
Liquid FS is highly corrosive to the skin. Splashes of liquid FS in 
the eyes produces extremely painful acid burns. Exposure to 
heavy concentrations or prolonged exposure to ordinary concen- 
trations may cause severe irritation of the eyes, the skin, and the 
respiratory tract. The protective mask should be worn in high FS 
smoke concentrations. Flush any liquid FS from the skin and eyes 
with water from your canteen (para ll-5c). 

c. HC Mixture (HC). This smoke in high concentrations such as 
might be encountered near an oi)erating munition, in an inclosed 
space, or near dense HC smoke screens and in ordinary field 
concentrations for a prolonged period may have a sufficient 
amount of zinc chloride built up to produce toxic effects. The 
protective mask should, therefore, be worn. The effects of ext>osiire 
to IKJ may include irritation of the nose and throat, coughing, 
choking, headache, fever, chest an<l mucular pains, and suffoca- 
tion. If nausea, vomiting, or difficulty in breatliing occurs, gut 
medical aid as soon as conditions permit. Aspirin will ease general 
discomfort. 

d. Oil Smoke. Inhalation of oil smoke produces no apparent 

137 



^ - U^■: - r«Ll 



r-rf . .-v-K^Pi- ^J^^r-^BiwMJ r*^ti^ e m u ■ r , iijii rfc >j^ T^ lf U j^Htf -^— ■ ^ 






symptoms immediately even thoup:h it is inhaled for extended 
l)eriods. OpemtiuK poisonTiel exposed to prolonged hij^h concentra- 
tions of od smolie should wear protective masks as much of the 
time as possible, since the development of pneumonia may occur 
with prolonged breathing of the smoke. 

e. White Phosphonts (WP) Smoke. This smoke is harmless in 
normal field conditions; however, injuries from burning solid or 
liquid WP are serious. These burns heal very slowly. For first aid 
measures, see paragraph 11-1 6a. 

11-16. Incendiaries 

Incendiaries cati be grouped as white phosphorous, thickened fuel 
metal, and oil and metal. You must learn to protect yourself 
against these types of incendiaries. 

a. White phosphorus (WP) is used primarily as a smoke producer 
but can be used for its incendiary effect to ignite field expedients 
and combustible name material. The burns from WP are usually 
multiple, deep, and variable in size. When particles of WP get on 
the skin or clothing, they continue to burn until deprived of an-. 
They also have a tendency to stick to a surface and must be 
brushed off or picked out. Should burning WP strike you— 

(1) Smother the flame by submerging yourself in water or by 
dousing the WP with water from your canteen or any other source. 
Urine, a wet cloth, or mud can be used. Copper sulfate pads, if 
available, can be wet and put over the burning WP. The copper 
sulfate reacts chemically to coat the phosphorus particles and to 
prevent further activity. You may be able to take off contaminated 
clothing quickly before the phosphorus bums through to the skm. 

Note- Since WP is [wisonouB to the system, grease or oil shouia NOT be used to 
smother the flame because the WP will be absorbed into the body with the 
grease or oil. 

(2) Keep the WP particles covered with wet material to exclude 
air until you can remove them or get them removed from your 

skin. 

(3) Remove the WP particles from the skin by brushing them 
with a wet cloth and by picking them out with a knife, bayonet, 
stick, or similar object. 

(4) Report to a medical facility for treatment as soon as your 
mission permits. 

b. Thickened fuel mixtures (napalm) have a tendency to cling to 
the clothing and the body surfaces, thereby producing prolonged 

13B 



exposures and severe burns. The first aid for these burns is the 
same as for other heat bums (para 7-12, 7-13, and 9-2). The heat 
and irritating gases given off by these combustible mixtures may 
cause lung damage, which must be treated by a medical officer. 

c. Metal incendiaries pose special problems. Thermite and ther- 
mate particles on the skin should be immediately cooled with 
water from your canteen and then removed. Even though ther- 
mate particles have their own oxygen supply and continvie to burn 
under water, it helps to cool them with water. The first aid for 
these bums is the same as for other heat bums (para 7-12 and 7- 
13). Particles of magnesium on the skin burn quickly and deeply. 
Like the other metal incendiaries, they must be removed. Ordinar- 
ily, the complete removal of these particles should be done by 
trained personnel at a medical treatment facility, using local 
anesthesia. Immediate medical treatment is required. 

d. Oil and metal incendiaries have mucli the same effect on 
contact with the skin and clothing as those discussed in b and c 
above. Appropriate first aid measures are described in paragraphs 
7-12 and 7-13. 



139 



--- L^r.-K-J m, _ _a -^F_ ri ■- 'iM-^mM§mm ^_ ^k| ^ ■ 



CHAPTER 12 
PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID 



Section I GENERAL 

12-1. Importance of Psychological First Aid 

First aid can be applied to "injuries" of the mind as well as to 
those of the body. You must, therefore, know how to give psycho- 
logical first aid in order to help yourself, your buddies, and your 
unit to keep fightinp:. -An emotional upset which results in poor 
judgment can be just as fatal as a bullet in the heart. It can be 
even more dangerous if other |>ersons are affected by the judg- 
ment of an emotionally upset person. 



12-2. Explanation of Term "Psychological First Aid" 

Psychological first aid is as natural and reasonable as physical 
first aid and is as familiar if you stop to think about it. When you 
were hurt as a child, the understanding attitude of your parents 
did as much as the "Band Aid" or the "Mercurochrome" to ease 
the pain. Later on, disappointment or grief was eased by encour- 
aging words from a friend. Certainly, taking a walk and talking 
things out with a friend are familiar ways of dealing with an 
emotional crisis. The same natural feelings that make us want to 
help a person who is injured make us want to give a helping hand 
to a buddy who is feeling emotionally "all shook up." You see, 
psychological first aid really means nothing more complicated 
than helping people with emotional injuries whether they result 
from physical injury, disease, or excessive or unbearable strain on 
their emotions. Emotional injuries are not as visible as a wound, a 
broken leg, or a reaction to pain from physical damage; but severe 
fear, excessive worry, depression, or overexcitement is evidence 
that emotional damage has occurred. The more noticeable the 

140 



symptom, the more urgent the need is for you to be of help and the 
more important it is for you to know how to help. 

12-3. Situations in Which Psychological First Aid May be 

Needed 

The situations which present the greatest need for psychological 
first aid ai*e those in which trained medical personnel are not 
immediately available. These situations occur in combat and 
civilian disasters such as floods, hurricanes, and catastrophes of 
nuclear warfare. It is worthwhile to remember that emotional 
reactions to such situations are usually temporary, lasting only for 
minutes, hours, or at the most a few days. However, they may be 
seriously disabhng, are often contagious, and may result in danger 
not only to the emotionally upset individual but also to the entire 
unit- In such situations you may be working beside someone who 
cannot handle the impact of disaster upon his emotions. Even 
when there is no danger of physical injury, psychological harm 
may occur. 



12—4. interrelation of Psychological First Aid and Physical - 

First Aid 

Psychological first aid often goes hand in hand with physical first 

aid. Tlie discovery of a physical injury does not rule out the 
possibihty of a psychological injury. A physical injury ami the 
circumstances surrounding it may actually cause an emotional 
injury. Both need treatment. The person suffering from pain, 
shock, fears of serious damage to his body, or even death does not 
respond well to joking, indifference, or fearful- tearful attention- 
Fear and anxiety may take as high a toll of the soldier's strength 
as does the loss of blood. 



12—5. Goats of Psychological First Aid 

The goals of psychological first aid are to — 

a- Return the soldier to duty as soon as ixjssible. 

b. Minimize his immediate disability even if prompt return to 
duty is not possible. 

c. Decrease the intensity of his emotional reaction until more 
complete care, if needed, can be arranged. 



d. Prevent actions harmful to him and to the efforts of others- 



141 






Section U. PRrNCIPLES OF PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID 

12—6. General 

Jtist as no one expects you to suljstitute for a suifreon it is tiot 
planned that you replace medical personnel in providing psycho- 
lopiciil aid. Your help, however, can be of great value until more 

qualified personnel become available. Effective first aid will help 
g^t the psychologically disabled soldier back into action sooner. An 
emotional reaction should not be too strange to you because you 
probably have experienced an emotional reaction yourself or have 
seen something like one but perhaps not as severe. Here are a few 
principles that will make your first aid job easier. 

12-7. Respect Everyone's Right to Have His Own Feelings 

a. Accept the soldier whom you are trying to help without 
censorship or ridicule. Accept his right to his own feelings. Just 
because your feelings, beliefs, and behavior are different, do not 
blame or make light of him for the way he feels or acts. Your job is 
to help him in this tough situation, not to be his critic. A person 
does not want to be upset and worried; he Would "snap out of it" if 
he could. When he seeks help, he needs and expects consideration 
of his fears, not abrupt dismissal, chidings, or accusations. You 
may be impressed with the fact that you made it through in good 
condition, but you have no guarantee that the situation will not be 
reversed the next time. 

b. Realize that people are the products of a wide variety of 
factors. All persons do not react the same way to the same 
situation. Each individual has complex needs and motivations, 
both conscious and unconscious, that are uniquely his own; thus, 
an injury or an emotional catastrophe will have a personal 
meaning for each individual. Even though you may not share the 
reactions or feelings of another person and even though the 
reactions seem foolish or peculiar, you must realize that he feels 
this way for a reason. You can help him most by accepting this 
fact and by doing what you can for him during this difficult time. 
He is doing the best he can under the circumstances. You must 
help him the best you can. 

12-8. Accept Emotional Disability As Being Just As Real As 

Physical Disability 

a- If a soldier's leg is blown off by a landmine, no one (including 
the wounded man himself) expects him to walk right away. If a 

142 



soldier's emotions are shattered by the overwhelming stress of 
more "blood and guts" than he can take for a while or by the 
explosion of a nuclear bomb, many people seem inclined to expect 
him to pull himself together immediately and carry on without a 
break. Some individuals can do this, but some cannot. The person 
who cannot has just as real a disability as the soldier who has lost 
his leg. There is an unfortunate tendency in many people to 
regard as real only those things they can see, such as a wound, 
bleeding", or an X-ray picture of a diseased lung. Some people tend 
to assume that damage which involves the mind and emotions is 
probably just imagined, that the person is not really sick or 
injured, and that he could overcome his trouble by using his 
willpower. 

b. The terms, "It's all in your head," "Snap out of it," "Buck up," 
arui "Get control of yourself are often used by people wlio believe 
they are being helpful. Actually, these terms are expressions of 
hostility because they show lack of understanthng. They only 
"goad" and emphasize weakness and inadequacy. Such terms are 
of no use in psychological first aid. A psychological patient or a 
physical patient with strong emotional reactions to his injury does 
not want to feel as he does. He would like to be effective, but he is 
temporarily overcome with fear and anxiety. He feels lost and 
unable to control his emotions for a while. Reminding him of his 
failure to act as others do only "rubs salt into the wound." 



12-9. Realize That Every Physically Injured Person Has Some 

Emotional ReacHon to the Fact That He Is Injured. 

a. A slight injury such as a cut finger gives most people a start. 
It is normal for an injured person to feel upset. The more severe 
the injiuy, the more insecure and fearful he becomes especially if 
the injury is to a body part which is highly valued. For exami)!e, 
an injury to the eyes or the genitals, even though a relatively 
minor one, is likely to be severely ujjsetting. An injury to some 
other pail of the body may be es]>ecially disturbing to an indivi<l- 
ual for his own particular reason. For example, an injury of the 
hand may be a terrifying blow to a basebuU pitcher or a i>ianist; a 
facial disfigurement may be esi)ecially threatening to an actor. 

b. An injured person always feels less secure, more anxious, and 
more afraid not only because of what has bapi)ened to him but 
because of more dire things he imagines may stiil hajipen as a 
result of his injury. This fear and insecurity may cause him to be 
irritable, stubborn, or unreasonable; be may seem uncoo]>erative, 

143 



unnecessnnly difficult, or even emotionally irrational. As you help 
him, always keep in mind that such behavior has little or nothing 
to do with you personally- He needs your patience, reassurance, 
encouragement and support. Even though he seems disagreeable 
and ungrateful at first, get across the idea that you want to help 
him. 

12-10. Realize There Is More Strength in Most Disturbed 

Soldiers Than Appears at First Glance 

An injured or sick person may not put his best foot forward. The 
strong points of his personality are likely to be hidden beneath his 
fear, anguish, and pain. It is easy to see only his failures even 
though he worked efficiently beside you only a short time ago. 
With your aid he will be helping you or someone else again. 
Whatever made him a good soldier, rifleman, or buddy is still 

there. He is needed. 



Section in. COMMON TYPES OF REACTIONS TO DISASTER 

12-n. Normal Reactions, Nonproblematic Type 

Most people react to a disaster (military or civilian, personal or 
public, threatened or actual) by doing something about it immedi- 
ately or within a few minutes after they "collect" themselves. With 
a few exceptions all people feel some fear. This fear may be greater 
than any you experienced at any other time, or you may be more 
aware of your fear. In such a situation you should not be surprised 
if you feel shaky, perspire profusely, and become a little nauseated 
and confused- These reactions are normal and are not cause for 
concern. Aaer a while, if you get busy, your heart will stop 
pounding, your breath will come back, and you will feel less tense, 

12-12, Normal Reactions, Problematic Type 

Some reactions can be easily recognized as problematic- The 
following are the most usual: 

a. Emotional Outbursts. Severe reactions to a disaster or accident 
usually appear first in the form of uncontrolled emotional out- 
bursts such as crying, shouting, or both. In this state, a ].erson is 
extremely restless and cannot be still. Typically, he runs about 
apparently witliout purpose. Inside of him he feels gieat rage or 
fear, and his physical acts oRen show this. He may strike out at 
others indiscriminately in his anger or try desperately to hide in 

144 



fright, which is usually accompanied by pounding heart, rapid 
breathing, nausea, or loss of bowel controK 

b. L088 of Ability to Adapt to The Enviroment In his desperate 
attempt to get away from the danger which has overwhelmed him, 
a person may suffer an unintentional loss or decrease in a number 
of his abilities. In the midst of a mortar attack, he may suddenly 
lose the ability to hear or to see. His intellectual ability may be so 
impaired he cannot think clearly or follow even simple commands. 
He may stand up in the midst of enemy fire or rush into a burning 
building, because his judgment is impaired and he cannot under- 
stand the likely consequences of his behavior. He may lose his 
ability to move and may seem paralyzed; he may faint; or he may 
lie down and babble like a child. In other cases overwhelming 
stress may produce symptoms which are often associated with 
head injury. For example, he may appear dazed or be found 
wandering about aimlessly. He may appear confused and diso- 
riented and may seem to have a complete or partial loss of 
memory. In such cases, especially when no eye witnesses can 
provide evidence that the person has not suffered a head injury, it 
is necessary for medical personnel to provide rapid evaluation for 
that possibility. 

c. Sleep Disturbance and Repetitions. A person who has been 
overwhelmed by disaster or some other stress rarely can sleep in 
his restless state. Although he is calmer and days or weeks have 
passed, he may start to have violent and terrifying nightmares in 
which all or a part of the original event is repeated, frequently in a 
distorted form. He may awaken and behave as though the disaster 
has struck again. For a while he may not be able to reaUze that it 
was, in fact, a dream. Even when awake, he may think repeatedly 
of the disaster, feel as though it is happening again, and act out 
parts of his stress over and over again. For some persons, this 
repetitious reexperiencing of the stressful e^ent may be necessary 
for event!:al recovery; therefore, it should not be discouraged or 
viewed as abnormal. For the person reexperiencing the event, 
such reaction may be somewhat disruptive and disturbing regard- 
less of the reassurance given him that it is normal. In such a 
situation, a "short cut" that is often possible entails getting the 
person to talk extensively, even repetitiously about the experience, 
his feeling^, etc. This should not be forced; rather, the person 
should be given repeated opportunity and supportive encourage- 
ment to talk in private, preferably to one person. This process 
which is known as "ventilation" is discussed fuither in paragraph 
12-15a. 

145 



-^-"■h- 



h a^ ^ r..^ p--^' f - - ^ ^ "H - -nr- m^^r^L'i -f^44wnE' 



d. pHychiatric Complications. Although the behaviors doscribed 
hi a through c above usually diminish with time, some do not. A 
person who has not unproved within a day or two or who becomes 
worse tieeds specializefl medical-psychiatric care. 

12-13. Helpful Hints in Recognizing Emotional Reactions 

You do not need much training to recojarnize severe problematic 
reactions. Reactions that are less severe, however, are more 
difficult to detect. To tietermine whetiier or not a person needs 
helj), you must observe him to learn whether or not he is doing 
something meaningful and is able to perform his duties and take 

care of himself. 



Section IV. PSYCHOLOGICAL FIRST AID 

12-14. General 

Psychological first aid measures are simple and easy to under- 
stand. Improvisation is in order, just as it is in splinting a fracture. 
Your judgment as to what to do depends upon your ability to 
observe the soldier and understand the needs to be met. Time is on 
your side and so are the resources of Uie soldier whom you are 
helping. Making the best use of his resources requires ingenuity 
on your part. 

12—15. Making Contact and Getting Through 

The emotionally disturbed soldier has erected a barrier against 
fear. If he finds that he doep not have to be afraid and that ther-e 
are normal, understandable things about him, he will feel safer in 
dropping this barrier. Persistent efforts to make him realize that 
you want to underetand liim will be reassuring. Familiar things 
such a- a rup of coffee, the use of his name, attention to even a 
minor wound, or the sight of familiar people and activities will add 
to his ability to overcome his fear. He will not respond well if you 
are excited, angry, or abrui)t. 

«. Ventilaiio7i. As stated in paragraph lZ-12c, after the soUher 
becomes calmer, he is likely to have dreams about the stressful 
event, to tlunk about it when he is awake, or even to repeat his 
pei"sonal reaction to the event. One benefit of this natural pattern 
is that it helps him master the stress by going over it just as one 
masters the initial fear of jumping from a diving board by 
repeated performances. Eventually, it is difficult to remend>er how 
frightening it was initially. In giving first aid to the emotional 

146 



soldier, you are to let him follow this natural pattern. Encourage 
him to talk and be a good listener. Let him tell his story in his own 
words about what actually hapi>ened. Your patient listening will 
prove to him that you are interested in him and, hy describing his 
personal catastrophe, he can work at mastering it. If lie becomes 
ovei-whelmed in the telling, suggest a cup of coffee or a break but 
assure him that you will listen again as soon as he is ready. With 
this psychological first aid, most soldiers stait toward recovery 
quickly. Nature is with them. 

6. Activity. 

(DA person who is emotionally disturbed as the result of 
combat or a catastrophe is basically a casualty of fear. He is 
disabled because he has become temjwrarily overwhelmed by fear, 
A good way to control fear is through activity. Almost all soldiers, 
for example, experience a considerable sense of fear while they aie 
poised, awaiting the opening of a big offensive; but this is normally 
relieved and they actually feel better once they begin to move into 
action. They take pride in effective performance and pleasure in 
knowing that they are good soldiers, perhaps being completely 
unaware that overcoming their fears was their first accomplish- 
ment. 

(2) Useful activity is very beneficial to the emotionally dis- 
turbed soldier who is not physically inca]>acitated. After you help a 
soldier to get over his initial fear, to regain some self-confidence, 
and to realize his job is to continue to function as best he can, you 
should then help him find sometViing useful to do. Encourage him 
to be active. Get him to carry litters, help load trucks, clean up 
debris, dig foxholes, or assist with refugees. If possible, get him 
back to his usual duty. Seek out his strong points and help him to 
apply them. Avoid having him just sit around. You will have to 
provide direction by telling him what to do and where to do it. The 
instructions should be clear and sinple; they should be lepeated; 
they should be reasonable and obviously possible. A person who is 
in panic is likely to argue. Respect his feelings but point out more 
immediate, obtainable, and demanding needs. Channel his exces- 
sive energy, and above all do not argue. If you cannot get him 
interested in doing more profitable work, it may be necessary to 
enlist aid in controlling his overactivity before it spreads to the 
group and results in more panic. Prevent the spread of such 
infectious feelings by restraining and segregating if necessary. 

i'A) Involvement in activity helps a soldier in three ways: 

(a) He foi'gets himself. 

(b) He has an outlet for his excessive tensions. 

147 



(c) He proves to himself he can do soniething useful. 
It is amazing how effective this is in helpinp: a person overcome 
feelings of fear, ineffectiveness, and uselessness. 

c. Rest. There are times, particularly in combat, when physical 
exhaustion is a principal cause for emotional reactions. For the 
weary, dirty soldier, adequate rest, warm food, and a chanf»:e of 
clothes with an opportunity to bathe may provide spectacular 
results, 

d. Usefulness of Group Spirit You have probably already no- 
ticed that a person works Iwtter, faces danger better, and handles 
serious problems better in a group. Each individual in a group 
supports the others and seems to be strengthened in turn by the 
group. For example, you can see the group spirit in the football 
team and in the school fraternity, as well as in the gang that is up 
to some devilment. Because the individuals share the same inter- 
est, goals, and problems, they do more and better work; further- 
more, they are less worried because everyone is helping. It is this 
group spirit that wins games, elects mayors, and takes a strategic 
hill in battle. It is so powerful that it is one of the most effective 
tools you have in psychological fii-st aid. Getting the soldier back 
into the group and letting him see its orderly and effective activity 
will reestablish his sense of belonging and security and will go far 
toward making him a useful member of the unit again. 

12-16. Your Reactions and Limitations 

a. Up to this point the discussion has been primarily about the 
feelings of the emotionally disturbed soldier. What about your 
feelings toward him? Whatever the situation, you will have emo- 
tional reactions (consciously or unconsciously) toward this soldier. 
Your reactions can either help or hinder your ability to help him. 
Especially when you are tired or worried, you may very easily 
become impatient with the jierson who seems to be "dragging his 
heels" or "making m^ ntains out of molehills." You may even feel 
resentful toward him. At times when many wounded lie about you, 
it will be especially natural for you to resent disabilities that you 
cannot see. Physical wounds can be seen and easily accej^ted. 
Emotional reactions are more difficult to accept as injuries. On the 
otiier hand, will you tend to be overly sympathetic? Excessive 
sympathy for an incapacitated person can be as harmful as 
negative feelings in your relationship with him. He needs strong 
help but not your sorrow. To overwhelm iiim with pity will make 
him feel even more inadequate. You must expect your buddy to 
recover, to be able to return to duty, and to become a useful 

148 



soldier. This expectation should be displayed in your behavior and 
attitude as well as in what you say. If he can see in you calmness, 
confidence, and competence, he will be reassured and will feel 
greater security in the world around him. 

b. Above all, you must guard against becoming impatient, 
intolerant, and resentful on one hand and overly solicitous on the 
other. Remember that such emotion in you will rarely help the 
soldier and can never increase your ability to make clear decisions. 

c. As with the physically injured soldier, the medical personnel 
will take over the care of the emotionally disturbed soldier as soon 
as possible. The first aid which he has received from you will be of 
great value to his recovery. 

12-17. Basic Guides 

a. Learn to detect problematic reactions in an individual who 
has undergone stressful situations and keep aware of the impor- 
tance of psychological first aid to his recovery. Remember that 
your help can be of great value. 

b. Realize that a soldier with an emotional disability is just as 
truly sick as a physically disabled one and just as able to recover if 
he is given the proper cure. 

c. Accept the soldier's reactions and feelings as the best he can 
do under the circumstances. Realize that he cannot change with- 
out help; otherwise, he would. 

d. Find effective ways of making contact with the soldier. In 
doing so, take into consideration the facts that he is disturbed, 
excessively frightened, and overly worried and that he has lost his 
ability to act as other persons do. By your words, attitude, and 
behavior, let him know of your willingness and ability to under- 
stand his feelings. Show patience and a real ..^sire to help. 

e. Help him to regain his confidence and to feel more secure in 
the world about him. Assure him that you exjject him to recover 
fully, that there is much he can do, an<l that there is a pressing 

need for his help. 



149 



■^^ ■■■! m0m *^fc^^*JPiifcMMWMiiMti^BMlBMBMifWi^MIWHMIWfcitfcJiBliaiMM<*MB^ Njf.-i 



-^-4tf^4^>*^^'?4^^v«^^4xM th:'-:-ii--i>: r^L -J4fM 7t ^^fv^^WV 



i-*t- h ^'p *- - -. --^■- - +1-^^^ 



APPENDIX A 
REFERENCES 



AR 310-25 Dictionaiy of United States Army Terms. 

AR 31(M>0 AutlioriKed Abbreviations and Brevity Codes. 

FM 21-10 Field Hyfriene and Sanitation. 

FM 21-40 Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear 

Defense, 
FM 21^1 Soldier's Handbook for Defense Against Chemical 

And Biological Operations and Nuclear 

Warfare. 



150 



APPENDIX B 
CONTENTS OF FJR5T AID CASE AND KITS 



Naii^jnal stock ^o. 



1. 8465-00-261^939 
6B10-O0-159-4883 

6505-00-663-2636 

2. 6545-00-922-1200 
6545-00-IIS-3722 



6505-00-106-0875 

6505-00-914-3693 

6B10-0a-15&-4883 

6510-00-200-3075 

6510-00-200-3185 

6510-00-201-1755 

651 0-OO-iifl 2-0750 
651f>-0(>-782-fil26 

6510-00-913-7909 

6515-00-764-042*5 

6545-00-853-6309 



HhU of 

NojnoicJattire itt'it 

CASE FIELD FIRST AID DRESSING 

Dre^sin^, First Aid Fitilil^ Individual 
Troopp Camouria^e^], 4 by 7 inches ,_ Ea 

Sodium Chloride— Sodium Bicarbonate 
Mixture Vg 

FIRST AID KIT, General Purpose 
(Rigid Case) 

Case, Medical Instrument and Supply, 
Sel^ PlastiCp Ki^idp Size A^ 7V2 inches 
Long by 4'/i inches Wide by 2^/^ 
inches High Ea 

Ammonia Inhalation Solution, Aro- 
matic, Ampules, Va cc, IO5 Pg 

Povidone-Iodine Solution, NF, 10%, '/a 
fl oz (14.8 cc), 5O5 Bx 

Dressing, First Aid, Field, Individual 
Troop, CuinouFlaKed, 4 by 7 inches ^_ Ea 

Comprejss and Bandage, Caniouflaged, 
2 by 2 inches, 4s Pg 

Bandage, Gauze, Compressed, Camou- 
flaged, 3 inches by 6 yarda Ea 

Bandage, Muslin, Compressed, Camoti- 
Haged. 37 by 37 by &2 inches Ea 

GauKe, Petrolatum, 3 by 2G inches, 3s Pg 
Adhesive l^aj*e. Surgical, Canioiiflage*!, 

1 inch by 1 yanl, HMIs _ . ^ Bk 

Banduge, Adhesive, ^Z* by 'S inches, 300s Bk 
Blade, Surgical Pjeparation Razor, 

Straight, Single Edge, 6s Pg 

First Aid Kit, Eye Dressing Ea 

Instriiciion t^ai'd, Artificial Respira- 
tion, Moutli-to-MiiUtb Resuscitation 

(In English) Ea 

Instruction Sheet, First Aid (In Eng- 
lish) Ea 

liistruction Sheet an<l List of CoiUents 
(In English) Ea 



QtxautUy 



1 



1 



1 



1/50 



1 



1 
1 

:(/ioo 

1 K'aiK) 

1 
J 



1 



1 



1 



151 



r^S^^H-z^L^LaW^ 



l^^vtT-bnfr-N^' ^^v ^ ^rftk ■ ^ - 13-. 



Xa^ior^nl Mfork ^i^rt. 



3. 6545-00-919-6R50 



65 15-00-9 12-0R69 



7rr f^pper Pocket 
650r>-0()-K)r>-<»R75 

65I0-OO-20K1755 

6510-00-202-0750 
6515-00-754-0120 

hi Lower Pocket 
6505-00-914-^593 

6510-00-159-^883 

6510-00-200-3185 

6510-00-783-6426 

6510-00-913-7909 
G5 1 5-00-853-6309 



rrll( ni 

FIRST AID KIT, Generftl Purpose 
( rjuipl-Moiiiited) 

CjisOp Medical luBtrument and Supply 
Set, Nylon, Nonrieid, No. 2, 7'/a 
inches, Lonpf by 4^/e inches Wide by 
4V2 inches High Ea 

Atnmonin Inlinlation Solution, Aro- 
matic, Ampuls, Vi cc, lOa Pr 

CoTnpress and Banda^ep Camounap:edp 
2 by 2 inches, 4s Fp 

Bnntlae^*, Muslin, Compressed, Camou- 
Raped, Wl by 37 by 52 inches Ea 

Gauze, Petrolatum, ;i by 36 inches, 3r Pp: 

Blade, Surgical Preparation Razor, 
Straight, SinfZfle Edf^e, 6s Pr 

Povidone- Jodine Solution, NF, 10%, V2 

fl oz(14-8ccK 50s Bx 

DressinK, First Aid, Field, Individual 
Troop, Camouflaged, 4 by 7 inches __ Ea 

Bandape, Gauze, Compressed, Camou- 
flawed, 3 inches by 6 yards Ea 

Adhesive Tape, Surgical, Caniouflaged, 
1 inch by 1 yard, 100s Bx 

BandaKe, Adhesive, ^Ia by 3 incheSp 300s Bx 

First Aid Kit, Eye Dressing Ea 

Instruction Card, Artificial Respira- 

tion, Moiith'to-mouth Resuscitation 

(In English) Ea 

Instruction Sheet, First Aid (In Eng- 

lish) Ea 

Instruction Sheet and List of Contents 

(In English) Ea 



Q\ir\M\t)/ 



1 

1 

1 
1 

1 



1/50 



3 



3/100 
18/.100 
1 



1 



I 



1 



152 



mDEX 



Airway: 

Defined ^l^^j^ 

Opemngof 2-2a. 3-2, 3-^(1). 

Amy] nitrite ainpula U-116 

Arteries 2-\h 

Artificial respiration, methods of: 

Back-pressure arm-lift ^-^c 'A-1 

Chest pressure arm-lift 3-ac 3-fi 

Mask-to-mouth HSd 

Mouth- to- mouth y.^^. 3 „ .| 

Mouth-to-nose 3_c; 

Bandages: 

Cravat g_g 

Purposes " 6-y, 6-fl 

Tailed g_r^ 

Triangular g_^ 

Bandaging of body parts: 

Ahdomen l-ll 

Armpit '"_'_ 6,iab 

Chest _ 'j_Q 

Ear ~ ^10 

Elbow g_j4 

Eyes 6_11 

Foot g_13 

Hand ^15 

Head 6^9 

Jaw g_,2 

Knee 6_lg 

Leg g_j7 

Shoulder 6-13 

Bioloijical agents, protection from n^^ i|_4 

Bites: 

Snake q_q^ 

Spider 9_g^ 

Bleeding, control of: 

Digital pressure 4_g 

Elevating the limb 4_rj 

Pressure dressing 4__2 4_6 

Tourniquet 4_2 4_9_4_i4 

Blood: 

Circulation 2-iU, Z'2b,c 

Loss 2-26.4-1 

Vessels 2-16 



8 

10. 11, 15 

135 
S 

U, iS 
U, 17 
130 
14 
17 

43 

40,43 
43 

43 

60 
49 

5y 

47 
51 
47 
55 
51 
44 
48 
53 
53 
4^ 

126, 126 

87 

88 

31 
31 

29—31 
29, 31, 35 

8, 10 
10 
8, 29 



153 



i|-*^P 



artf^Lr* 






ParaBrBph Pbk* 



Breathing (S«e ReBpiration.) 
Burna: 

Incendiaries, from 11-16 

Minor "~2 

Screeiiing smokes, from 11-15 



138 

84 
137 



Severe 7-12.7-13 fil 

S 



B 
91 



Canteen cap, Ml protective 7-136(3) 

Capillaries 2-16 

t'nrl>nn: 

[tioxiile . - — ... 2-jre 

Monoxide iwisoninR 9-10 

Carries, manual: 

One-man carries: 

Arms carry ICMc 99 

Cradle drop draK KMi 99 

Fireman's carry 10-4a 98 

NeckdraK ^^-^ 99 

rack-strap carry I0~ie 99 

IMstol-belt: 

Carry 1<M/* 99 

DraK 10^ 99 

Saddleback carry ^0-4d 99 

Supportinfc carry 10-4ft 99 

Tw(>-man carries: 

Arms carry i0-5b 100 

Fore-and-aft carry 10-5c 100 

Four-hand sent carry lO-Pxi 100 

SupportinK carry 10-5a 99 

Two-hand seat carry 10-5« 100 

Chemical agents: 

Blister 11-9 

RIood 11-11 >^^ 

Choking 1^-10 

Incapacitating 31-14 

Incentliaries 1 !"!*► 

Nerve H-^ 

Screening smokes 11-15 

Tear 11-12 

Vomiting 11-13 

Chemical attack, first aid for 10-5 

Chest caee 2-la(l), 3-96 8.21 

Circulation 2-lb " 

Closed-chest heart massape 3_8— 3-14 21 27 

Clothing . l-56{2), 5^, 5-8 7,37.39 

Cold, conditions caused by 9-6 

CoiiihoPen Auto- Injector ll-8c 

Contamination 2-2d 10 

Contents of First Aid Case and Kits '^ 151 

Delirium 9-13c 94 

DiaphraRm 2-1^(2) R 

Digital pressure ^-^ '^1 

Disaster, reactions to -- 12-11—12-13 144—146 

154 



134 



135 
136 
138 
127 
137 
135 
I3G 
99 



87 
129 



Dislocation of bone 8-2 

D re ssi n^: 

Field first aid l^d, 6^ 

Wounds 4^ — 4-6, 6-1 

Drowning 9-11 

Ear, foreign body in 9^ 

Electric shock 9-12 

Elevation of lower extremities 1-56(7), 5-7 

Emotional disability 12-8 

Equipment (See First aid.) 

Exhalation 2-1 

Eye, forcijjn body in 9-3 

First aid: 

Case, field 1-4, app B 

Do'a and do not's 1^ 

Etjiiipnient for toxic environment 11-2 

Guides, basic 1-5 

Importance of 1—1 

Hems 1—1, app B 

Kit: 

Decuntuminatinnf 11-26, d 

General purpose ai>i> B 

Measures: 

Common emergencies 9-1 — 9-14 

Immobilization of fractures 8-1 — 8-11 

Lifeaaving (A) 3-1— S-14 

Lifesavini;^ (B) 4-1 — 4-14 

Lifesaving (C) 5-1—5-8 

Lifesaving (D> 6-1—6-18 

Psychological 12-1—12-17 

Special 7-1—7-13 

Toxic environment 1 1-1—11-16 

Foot: 

Frostbite i>-9c 

Immersion 9-96 

Trouble 9-5 

Trench 9-9a 

Fractures: 

Closed 8-2a 

Open 8-2t 

Signs of 8-3 

Splinting and immobilizing: 

Bandages for 8-6c 

Collarbone 8-9i> 

lmj>rovisatioiis for 8-G 

Jaw 8-9a 

Lower extremities 8-8 

Neck 8-11 

Pudding for 8-*> 

Purpose for 8—1 

Rules for 8-5 

Shoulder 8-9c 

Slings for ^ 8-6d 



I'age 



64 



4.41 
6-5 29—31.40- 
92 
85 
92 
7,37 
142 

8 

85 

4, 151 

6 

124 
6 
4 

4, 151 

125 
151 

84—95 

64—81 

11—28 

29— 3 B 

36—39 

40—55 

140— U9 

56—63 

123—139 

90 
90 
86 

90 

64 
64 

64 

67 

77 

67 

77 

74 

81 

67 

66 

66 

77 

67 

155 



43 



F~k LhH ■ 



FnrKurftph 

Spinal cnliimn R-10 

Upper extremities 8-7 

Frostbite 9-9c 

Germs 2-3d 

Heart: 

PerineH 2~16 

Masanpe, closed-eliest: 

Applirntini! -"^R — !J~-ll 

Cessntioii ___ fV-14 

One rescuer, witli 3-13 

Two rescuers, with 3-12 

ilenrthent 2-16(1), 2-2x1, 3-.U 

Heat: 

Cramps 9-8c 

Exhaustion 9-8a 

Heatstroke 9-86 

Heimlich huff 9-14 

Immersion foot 9-96 

Infection, prevention of 2-2d, 4-5, 6-1 — 6- 

18 

Inhalation 2-1 

Injector, nerve agent antidote ll-2c, ll-8c 

Kit: 

Uecontaminatinpr ll-26,d 

First aid, Keneral purpose app B 

Life-saving measures: 

A— Airway, hrenthinjf, hearthent 3-1 — 3-14 

B— Stop bleeding 4_l_4-14 

C — Prevent shock 5-1—5-8 

1) — Pi'eveiit irifectioii - • — • - ^-^ — fi-lR 

Litters, improvise<! \*^-f\ 

Lungs 2-3a(l) 

Maintenance of manual 1-3 

Mask, protective: 

Conditions for use 11-4 

Equipment ll-2a 

Artificial respiration with ll-8d 

Measures, first aid iB^e First aid measures.) 

Nerve agents 11-6 — 11-8 

Nose, foreign body in 9-4 

One-man carries 10-4 

Oxygen 2-16, 2-2 

Poisoning from: 

Carbon monoxide 9-10 

Nerve agents 11-6 — 11-8 

Plants, from 9-7 

Positioning injured soldiers witti/for: 

Abdominal wound 7-llc 

Artifical respiration 3-2, 3^o, 3-6a<2), 

^76 

156 



23 



pBKe 

78 
67 
90 
10 

8 

21 
28 
27 
23 
8, 10, 14 

89 
89 
89 
95 

90 

10, 30, 40—55 

8 

125, 129 

125 

161 



11—28 
29—35 
36—39 

40— r>fi 

100 
8 



126 
126 
130 



127—128 
85 

98 

8, 10 



91 
127-128 

88 

60 
11,16,17,18 



Pura^raph Page 



60 
22 
6,68 



Cheat, sucking wound of 7_96 

Closed-chest heart masaag-e 3-10 

Face wound ;" l-5Ml),7-76 

Fractures: 

t^\ 1-6M5). 4-7. 8-5a 7.31,66 

Neck 8-na(2) 

Spinal column 8-10a(2), b 

Head injury l-5fc(7), 7-5b 

Neck wound 1-56(1), 7-76 

Siiock prevention 5.7 

Snakebite _„. iy-tiaiU 87 



81 
79 
7, 67 

6,68 
37 



IJnconaciona I-6MI), iJ-Klr* 

Pressure points 4_^ 

Prickly heat q_^ 

Psychological first aid: 

Basic guides 12-17 

Defined 12-2 

Ciuals of 12-5 



6 

31 
88 

140 
141 
140 



141 

142—144 

144—146 



Importance of y^-l 146— 14& 

Measures 12-14 12-17 

Need for 12-3,12-4 

Principles of 12-6—12-10 

Reaction requirinK 12-11— 12-ia 10 21 

Pulse 2-16(2), 1^8 3 ' 

Purpose of manual i_i 

Rate of: 

Artificial respiration 3-4/-, 3-66(3), 3- 15,17,18 

76{6) 
Closed-chest heart massage with: 

One rescuer 3-13 27 

Two rescuer li-12 23 

Pulse 2-16(2) 10 

Respiration 2-la(2) 8 



37 
150 



Reassuring injured soldier 5_5 

References 
Respiration: 

Artificial ;i_3_3_7^ 3_12, 3- 14—18.23,2 

13 

Defined 2-la g 

Scorpion sting tMlc HS 

Shock: 

Defined 2-2c 10 

Electric ^12 92 

Prevention _ 5-1-5-8 36—39 

Signs . 5-lt y(i 

Skin eru|itions from plants i)~l h8 

Snake hite IMw 87 

Snow blindness H-M 91 

Sodiiiin chloride-sodium bicarbonate 1—Ui, 7-136(1) 4, 62 

Spider bite i>-66 88 

Splir^ting of fracture (See 
Fractures, splinting.) 

157 



L^^P- -TH 



L-^frrii- — ■ — ■ — 



Sprains f^3a di 

Sunburn 9-S ^8 

Sunstroke {See TIpntatroke.) 

Siipplios {See First nid.) 

Thront, foreiRn body in 9^, 9-H 85,95 

Tourniquet: 

Application of 4-9—4-13 31—35 

MarkinK ^1^ 35 

Toxic cnvirniinient: 
First iii<i for: 

Blister asents n-9c 134 

Blood aKents H-11 135 

Chemical attack H-S 12fi 

Choking HKcnts H-IO 135 

Incapacitating: agents 11-14 13fi 

Incendiaries 11-16 138 

Nerve Brents 11-8 128 

Screening smokes 11-16 137 

Tear aprents 11-12 135 

Vomiting apents 11-13 136 

Protection from 11-2. U^ 124, 126 

Trachea, obstruction of 9-1^ 95 

TransportinR the wounded soldier 10-1—10-6 97—100 

Trench foot 9-^ 90 

Two-man carries 10-5 99 

Unconsciousness Q-i^ 93 

Veins ^1* ^ 

Vital body functions 2-2 



10 



Wounds: 

All 4_1„4-14 29—35 

Minor 9-1.9-2 R4 

Severe: 

Abdominal 7-10.7-11 fiO 

Bnrns 7-12,7-13 CI 

Chest, auckliiR 7-8.7-9 58,59 

Face 7-6.7-7 57 

Head 7^-7-5 56-57 

Neck '7-6,7-7 57 



15B 



By Order of the Secretary of tlie Army: 



FREDC. WEYAND 
General, United States Artny 
Official: Chief ofStaff 

PAUL T. SMITH 

Major General, United States Army 
Tfie Adjutant General 



Distribution: 

Active Army, ARNG, USAR: To be distributed in accordance 
with DA Form 12-llA requirements for First Aid for SoJdiers (Qty 
rqr block no. 161). 



