P O I S O N O U S P L A N T S
Plants basically poison on contact, ingestion, or by ab-
sorption or inhalation. They cause painful skin irrita-
tions upon contact, they cause internal poisoning when
eaten, and they poison through skin absorption or inha-
lation in respiratory system. Many edible plants have
deadly relatives and look-alikes. Preparation for mili-
tary missions includes learning to identify those harmful
plants in the target area. Positive identification of edible
plants will eliminate the danger of accidental poisoning.
There is no room for experimentation where plants are
concerned, especially in unfamiliar territory.
C-0

Castor bean, castor-oil plant, palma Christi
Ricinus communis
Spurge (Euphorbiaceae) Family
Description: The castor bean is a semiwoody plant with large, alternate, starlike leaves
that grows as a tree in tropical regions and as an annual in temperate regions. Its flow-
ers are very small and inconspicuous. Its fruits grow in clusters at the tops of the
plants.
CAUTION
All parts of the plant are very poisonous to eat. The seeds are large and may be
mistaken for a beanlike food.
Habitat and Distribution: This plant is found in all tropical regions and has been intro-
duced to temperate regions.
C-1

Chinaberry
Melia azedarach
Mahogany (Meliaceae) Family
Description: This tree has a spreading crown and grows up to 14 meters tall. It has
altemate, compound leaves with toothed leaflets. Its flowers are light purple with a dark
center and grow in ball-like masses. It has marble-sized fruits that are light orange
when first formed but turn lighter as they become older.
CAUTION
All parts of the tree should be considered dangerous if eaten. Its leaves are a natural
insecticide and will repel insects from stored fruits and grains. Take care not to eat
leaves mixed with the stored food.
Habitat and Distribution: Chinaberry is native to the Himalayas and eastern Asia but is
now planted as an omamental tree throughout the tropical and subtropical regions. It
has been introduced to the southern United States and has escaped to thickets, old
fields, and disturbed areas.
C-2

Cowhage, cowage, cowitch
Mucuna pruritum
Leguminosae (Fabaceae) Family
Description: A vinelike plant that has oval leaflets in groups of three and hairy spikes
with dull purplish flowers. The seeds are brown, hairy pods.
CAUTION
Contact with the pods and flowers causes irritation and blindness if in the eyes.
C-3

Death camas, death lily
Zigadenus species
Lily (Liliaceae) Family
Description: This plant arises from a bulb and may be mistaken for an onionlike
plant. Its leaves are grasslike. Its flowers are six-parted and the petals have a green,
heart-shaped structure on them. The flowers grow on showy stalks above the leaves.
CAUTION
All parts of this plant are very poisonous. Death camas does not have the onion
smell.
Habitat and Distribution: Death camas is found in wet, open, sunny habitats, although
some species favor dry, rocky slopes. They are common in parts of the western United
States. Some species are found in the eastern United States and in parts of the North
American western subarctic and eastern Siberia.
C-4

Lantana
Lantana camara
Vervain (Verbenaceae) Family
Descrlptlon: Lantana is a shrublike plant that may grow up to 45 centimeters high. It
has opposite, round leaves and flowers borne in flat-topped clusters. The flower color
(which varies in different areas) maybe white, yellow, orange, pink, or red. It has a
dark blue or black berrylike fruit. A distinctive feature of all parts of this plant is its
strong scent.
CAUTION
All parts of this plant are poisonous if eaten and can be fatal. This plant causes
dermatitis in some individuals.
Habitat and Distribution: Lantana is grown as an omamental in tropical and temperate
areas and has escaped cultivation as a weed along roads and old fields.
C-5

Manchineel
Hippomane mancinella
Spurge (Euphorbiaceae) Family
Description: Manchineel is a tree reaching up to 15 meters high with alternate, shiny
green leaves and spikes of small greenish flowers. Its fruits are green or greenish-
yellow when ripe.
CAUTION
This tree is extremly toxic. It causes severe dermatitis in most individuals after only
.5 hour. Even water dripping from the leaves may cause dermatitis. The smoke from
burning it irritates the eyes. No part of this plant should be considered a food.
Habitat and Distribution: The tree prefers coastal regions. Found in south Florida, the
Caribbean, Central America, and northern South America.
C-6

Oleander
Nerium oleander
Dogbane (Apocynaceae) Family
Description: This shrub or small tree grows to about 9 meters, with alternate, very
straight, dark green leaves. Its flowers may be white, yellow, red, pink, or intermediate
colors. Its fruit is a brown, podlike structure with many small seeds.
CAUTION
All parts of the plant are very poisonous. Do not use the wood for cooking; it gives
off poisonous fumes that can poison food.
Habitat and Distribution: This native of the Mediterranean  area is now grown as an
ornamental in tropical and temperate regions.
C-7

Pangi
Pangium edule
Pangi Family
Description: This tree, with heart-shaped leaves in spirals, reaches a height of 18 me-
ters. Its flowers grow in spikes and are green in color. Its large, brownish, pear-shaped
fruits grow in clusters.
CAUTION
All parts are poisonous, especially the fruit.
Habitat and Distribution: Pangi trees grow in southeast Asia
C-8

Physic nut
Jatropha curcas
Spurge (Euphoriaceae) Family
Description: This shrub or small tree has large, 3- to 5-parted alternate leaves. It has
small, greenish-yelllow flowers and its yellow, apple-sized fruits contain three large
seeds.
CAUTION
The seeds taste sweet but their oil is violently purgative. All parts of the physic nut
are poisonous.
Habitat and Distribution: Throughout the tropics and southern United States.
C-9

Poison hemlock, fool's parsley
Conium maculatum
Parsley (Apiaceae) Family
Description: This  biennial herb may grow to 2.5 meters high. The smooth, hollow stem
may or may not be purple or red striped or mottled. Its white flowers are small and
grow in small groups that tend to form flat umbels. Its long, turniplike taproot is solid.
CAUTION
This plant is very poisonous and even a very small amount may cause death. This
plant is easy to confuse with wild carrot or Queen Anne’s lace, especially in its first
stage of growth. Wild carrot or Queen Anne’s lace has hairy leaves and stems and
smells like carrot. Poison hemlook does not.
Habitat and Distribution: Poison hemlock grows in wet or moist ground like swamps,
wet meadows, stream banks, and ditches. Native to Eurasia, it has been introduced to
the United States and Canada.
C-10

Poison ivy and poison oak
Toxicodendron radicans and Toxicodendron diversibba
Cashew (Anacardiacese) Family
Description: These two plants are quite similar in appearance and will often cross-
breed to make a hybrid. Both have altemate, compound leaves with three leaflets.
The leaves of poison ivy are smooth or serrated. Poison oak’s leaves are lobed and
resemble oak leaves. Poison ivy grows as a vine along the ground or climbs by red
feeder roots. Poison oak grows like a bush. The greenish-white flowers are small and
inconspicuous and are followed by waxy green berries that turn waxy white or yellow,
then gray.
CAUTION
All parts, at all times of the year, can cause serious contact dermatitis.
Habitat and Distribution: Poison ivy and oak can be found in almost any habitat in
North America.
C-11

Poison sumac
Toxicodendron vernix
Cashew (Anacardiacese) Family
Description: Poison sumac is a shrub that grows to 8.5 meters tall. It has alternate,
pinnately compound Ieafstalks with 7 to 13 leaflets. Flowers are greenish-yellow and
inconspicuous and are followed by white or pale yellow berries.
CAUTION
All parts can cause serious contact dermatitis at all times of the year.
Habitat and Distribution: Poison sumac grows only in wet, acid swamps in North
America.
C-12

Renghas tree, rengas tree, marking nut, black-varnish tree
Gluta
Cashew (Anacardiacese) Family
Description: This family comprises about 48 species of trees or shrubs with alternating
leaves in terminal or axillary panicles. Flowers are similar to those of poison ivy and
oak.
CAUTION
Can cause contact dermatitis similar to poison ivy and oak.
Habitat and Distribution: India, east to Southeast Asia.
C-13

Rosary pea or crab's eyes
Abrus precatorius
Leguminosae (Fabaceae) Family
Description: This plant is a vine with alternate compound leaves, light purple flowers,
and beautiful seeds that are red and black.
CAUTION
This plant is one of the most danderous plants. One seed may contain enough
poison to kill an adult.
Habitat and Distribution: This is a common weed in parts of Africa, southern Florida,
Hawaii, Guam, the Caribbean, and Central and South America.
C-14

Strychnine tree
Nux vomica
Logania (Loganiaceae) Family
Description: The strychnine tree is a medium-sized evergreen, reaching a height of
about 12 meters, with a thick, frequently crooked trunk. Its deeply veined oval leaves
grow in alternate pairs. Small, loose clusters of greenish flowers appear at the ends
of branches and are followed by fleshy, orange-red berries about 4 centimeters in
diameter.
CAUTION
The berries contain the dislike seeds that yield the poisonous substance strych-
nine. All parts of the plant are poisonous.
Habitat and Distribution: A native of the tropics and subtropics of southeastern Asia
and Australia.
C-15

Trumpet vine or trumpet creeper
Campsis radicans
Trumpet creeper (Bignoniaceae) Family
Description: This woody vine may climb to 15 meters high. It has pealike fruit cap-
sules. The leaves are pinnately compound, 7 to 11 toothed leaves per leaf stock. The
trumpet-shaped flowers are orange to scarlet in color.
CAUTION
This plant causes contact dermatitis.
Habitat and Distribution: This vine is found in wet woods and thickets throughout
eastern and central North America.
C-16

Water hemlock or spotted cowbane
Cicuta maculata
Parsley (Apiaceae) Family
Description: This perennial herb may grow to 1.8 meters high. The stem is hollow and
sectioned off like bamboo. It may or may not be purple or red striped or mottled. Its
flowers are small, white, and grow in groups that tend to form flat umbels. Its roots
may have hollow air chambers and, when cut, may produce drops of yellow oil.
CAUTION
This plant is very poisonous and even a very small amount of this plant may cause
death. Its roots have been mistaken for parsnips.
Habitat and Distribution: Water hemlock grows in wet or moist ground like swamps,
wet meadows, stream banks, and ditches throughout the Unites States and Canada.
C-17
