D A N G E R O U S F I S H
A N D M O L L U S K S
Since fish and mollusks may be one of your major
sources of food, it is wise to know which ones are danger-
ous to you should you catch them. Know which ones are
dangerous, what the dangers of the various fish are, what
precautions to take, and what to do if you are injured by
one of these fish.
Fish and mollusks will present a danger in one of three
ways: by attacking and biting you, by injecting toxic
venom into you through its venomous spines or tentacles,
and through eating fish or mollusks whose flesh is toxic.
The danger of actually encountering one of these danger-
ous fish is relatively small, but it is still significant. Any one
of these fish can kill you. Avoid them if at all possible.
F-O

FISH THAT ATTACK MAN
The shark is usually the first fish that comes to mind when considering
fish that attack man. Other fish also fall in this category, such as the
barracuda, the moray eel, and the piranha.
Sharks
Sharks are potentially the most dangerous fish that attack people. The
obvious danger of sharks is that they are capable of seriously maiming
or killing you with their bite. Of the many shark species, only a rela-
tive few are dangerous. Of these, four species are responsible for
most cases of shark attacks on humans. These are the white, tiger,
hammerhead, and blue sharks. There are also records of attacks by
ground, gray nurse, and mako sharks. See Figure F-1 for illustrations
of sharks.
Avoid sharks if at all possible. Follow the procedures discussed in
Chapter 16 to defend yourself against a shark attack.
Sharks vary in size, but there is no relationship between the size of the
shark and likelihood of attack. Even the smaller sharks can be danger-
ous, especially when they are traveling in schools.
If bitten by a shark, the most important measure for you to take is to
stop the bleeding quickly. Blood in the water attracts sharks. Get your-
self or the victim into a raft or to shore as soon as possible. If in the wa-
ter, form a circle around the victim (if not alone), and stop the bleeding
with a tourniquet.
Other Ferocious Fish
In salt water, other ferocious fish include the barracuda, sea bass,
and moray eel (Figure F-2). The sea bass is usually an open water
fish. It is dangerous due to its large size. It can remove large pieces
of flesh from a human. Barracudas and moray eels have been known
to attack man and inflict vicious bites. Be careful of these two species
when near reefs and in shallow water. Moray eels are very aggressive
when disturbed.
In fresh water, piranha are the only significantly dangerous fish. They
are inhabitants of the tropics and are restricted to northern South
F-1

F-2

America. These fish are fairly small, about 5 to 7.5 centimeters, but they
have very large teeth and travel in large schools. They can devour a
135-kilogram hog in minutes.
VENOMOUS FISH AND INVERTEBRATES
There are several species of venomous fish and invertebrates, all of
which live in salt water. All of these are capable of injecting poisonous
venom through spines located in their fins, tentacles, or bites. Their
venoms cause intense pain and are potentially fatal. If injured by one
of these fish or invertebrates, treat the injury as for snakebite.
F-3

F-4

F-5

F-6

F-7

F-8

F-9

FISH WITH TOXIC FLESH
There are no simple rules to tell edible fish from those with poisonous
flesh. The most common toxic fish are shown in Figure 8-2. All of
these fish contain various types of poisonous substances or toxins in
their flesh and are dangerous to eat. They have the following common
characteristics:
Most live in shallow water around reefs or lagoons.
Many have boxy or round bodies with hard shell-like skins covered
with bony plates or spines. They have small parrotlike mouths, small
gills, and small or absent belly fins. Their names suggest their shape.
In addition to the above fish and their characteristics, barracuda and red
snapper fish may carry ciguatera, a toxin that accumulates in the systems
of fish that feed on tropical marine reefs.
Without specific local information, take the following precautions:
Be very careful with fish taken from normally shallow lagoons with
sandy or broken coral bottoms. Reef-feeding species predominate and
some may be poisonous.
Avoid poisonous fish on the leeward side of an island. This area
of shallow water consists of patches of living corals mixed with
open spaces and may extend seaward for some distance. Many
different types of fish inhabit these shallow waters, some of which
are poisonous.
Do not eat fish caught in any area where the water is unnaturally
discolored. This may be indicative of plankton that cause various
types of toxicity in plankton-feeding fish.
Try fishing on the windward side or in deep passages leading from
the open sea to the lagoon, but be careful of currents and waves.
Live coral reefs drop off sharply into deep water and form a dividing
line between the suspected fish of the shallows and the desirable deep-
water species. Deepwater fish are usually not poisonous. You can
catch the various toxic fish even in deep water. Discard all suspected
reef fish, whether caught on the ocean or the reef side.
F-10
